
_The good-morrow._

  I wonder by my troth, what thou, and I
  Did, till we lov'd? were we not wean'd till then?
  But suck'd on countrey pleasures, childishly?
  Or snorted we in the seaven sleepers den?
  T'was so; But this, all pleasures fancies bee.                     5
  If ever any beauty I did see,
  Which I desir'd, and got, t'was but a dreame of thee.

  And now good morrow to our waking soules,
  Which watch not one another out of feare;
  For love, all love of other sights controules,                    10
  And makes one little roome, an every where.
  Let sea-discoverers to new worlds have gone,
  Let Maps to other, worlds on worlds have showne,
  Let us possesse one world, each hath one, and is one.

  My face in thine eye, thine in mine appeares,                     15
  And true plaine hearts doe in the faces rest,
  Where can we finde two better hemispheares
  Without sharpe North, without declining West?
  What ever dyes, was not mixt equally;
  If our two loves be one, or, thou and I                           20
  Love so alike, that none doe slacken, none can die.





_Song._

  Goe, and catche a falling starre,
    Get with child a mandrake roote,
  Tell me, where all past yeares are,
    Or who cleft the Divels foot,
  Teach me to heare Mermaides singing,                               5
    Or to keep off envies stinging,
      And finde
      What winde
  Serves to advance an honest minde.

  If thou beest borne to strange sights,                            10
    Things invisible to see,
  Ride ten thousand daies and nights,
    Till age snow white haires on thee,
  Thou, when thou retorn'st, wilt tell mee
  All strange wonders that befell thee,                             15
      And sweare
      No where
  Lives a woman true, and faire.

  If thou findst one, let mee know,
    Such a Pilgrimage were sweet;                                   20
  Yet doe not, I would not goe,
    Though at next doore wee might meet,
  Though shee were true, when you met her,
  And last, till you write your letter,
      Yet shee                                                      25
      Will bee
  False, ere I come, to two, or three.




_Womans constancy._

  Now thou hast lov'd me one whole day,
  To morrow when thou leav'st, what wilt thou say?
  Wilt thou then Antedate some new made vow?
              Or say that now
  We are not just those persons, which we were?                      5
  Or, that oathes made in reverentiall feare
  Of Love, and his wrath, any may forsweare?
  Or, as true deaths, true maryages untie,
  So lovers contracts, images of those,
  Binde but till sleep, deaths image, them unloose?                 10
              Or, your owne end to Justifie,
  For having purpos'd change, and falsehood; you
  Can have no way but falsehood to be true?
  Vaine lunatique, against these scapes I could
              Dispute, and conquer, if I would,                     15
              Which I abstaine to doe,
  For by to morrow, I may thinke so too.






_The undertaking._

  I have done one braver thing
    Then all the _Worthies_ did,
  And yet a braver thence doth spring,
    Which is, to keepe that hid.

  It were but madnes now t'impart                                    5
    The skill of specular stone,
  When he which can have learn'd the art
    To cut it, can finde none.

  So, if I now should utter this,
    Others (because no more                                         10
  Such stuffe to worke upon, there is,)
    Would love but as before.

  But he who lovelinesse within
    Hath found, all outward loathes,
  For he who colour loves, and skinne,                              15
    Loves but their oldest clothes.

  If, as I have, you also doe
    Vertue'attir'd in woman see,
  And dare love that, and say so too,
    And forget the Hee and Shee;                                    20

  And if this love, though placed so,
    From prophane men you hide,
  Which will no faith on this bestow,
    Or, if they doe, deride:

  Then you have done a braver thing                                 25
    Then all the _Worthies_ did;
  And a braver thence will spring,
    Which is, to keepe that hid.




_The Sunne Rising._

        Busie old foole, unruly Sunne,
        Why dost thou thus,
  Through windowes, and through curtaines call on us?
  Must to thy motions lovers seasons run?
        Sawcy pedantique wretch, goe chide                           5
        Late schoole boyes, and sowre prentices,
    Goe tell Court-huntsmen, that the King will ride,
    Call countrey ants to harvest offices;
  Love, all alike, no season knowes, nor clyme,
  Nor houres, dayes, moneths, which are the rags of time.           10

        Thy beames, so reverend, and strong
        Why shouldst thou thinke?
  I could eclipse and cloud them with a winke,
  But that I would not lose her sight so long:
        If her eyes have not blinded thine,                         15
        Looke, and to morrow late, tell mee,
    Whether both the'India's of spice and Myne
    Be where thou leftst them, or lie here with mee.
  Aske for those Kings whom thou saw'st yesterday,
  And thou shalt heare, All here in one bed lay.                    20

        She'is all States, and all Princes, I,
        Nothing else is.
  Princes doe but play us; compar'd to this,
  All honor's mimique; All wealth alchimie.
        Thou sunne art halfe as happy'as wee,                       25
        In that the world's contracted thus;
    Thine age askes ease, and since thy duties bee
    To warme the world, that's done in warming us.
  Shine here to us, and thou art every where;
  This bed thy center is, these walls, thy spheare.                 30





_The Indifferent._

  I can love both faire and browne,
  Her whom abundance melts, and her whom want betraies,
  Her who loves lonenesse best, and her who maskes and plaies,
  Her whom the country form'd, and whom the town,
  Her who beleeves, and her who tries,                               5
  Her who still weepes with spungie eyes,
  And her who is dry corke, and never cries;
  I can love her, and her, and you and you,
  I can love any, so she be not true.

  Will no other vice content you?                                   10
  Wil it not serve your turn to do, as did your mothers?
  Or have you all old vices spent, and now would finde out others?
  Or doth a feare, that men are true, torment you?
  Oh we are not, be not you so,
  Let mee, and doe you, twenty know.                                15
  Rob mee, but binde me not, and let me goe.
  Must I, who came to travaile thorow you,
  Grow your fixt subject, because you are true?

  _Venus_ heard me sigh this song,
  And by Loves sweetest Part, Variety, she swore,                   20
  She heard not this till now; and that it should be so no more.
  She went, examin'd, and return'd ere long,
  And said, alas, Some two or three
  Poore Heretiques in love there bee,
  Which thinke to stablish dangerous constancie.                    25
  But I have told them, since you will be true,
  You shall be true to them, who'are false to you.



_Loves Vsury._

  For every houre that thou wilt spare mee now,
          I will allow,
  Usurious God of Love, twenty to thee,
  When with my browne, my gray haires equall bee;
  Till then, Love, let my body raigne, and let                       5
  Mee travell, sojourne, snatch, plot, have, forget,
  Resume my last yeares relict: thinke that yet
          We'had never met.

  Let mee thinke any rivalls letter mine,
          And at next nine                                          10
  Keepe midnights promise; mistake by the way
  The maid, and tell the Lady of that delay;
  Onely let mee love none, no, not the sport;
  From country grasse, to comfitures of Court,
  Or cities quelque choses, let report                              15
          My minde transport.

  This bargaine's good; if when I'am old, I bee
          Inflam'd by thee,
  If thine owne honour, or my shame, or paine,
  Thou covet most, at that age thou shalt gaine.                    20
  Doe thy will then, then subject and degree,
  And fruit of love, Love I submit to thee,
  Spare mee till then, I'll beare it, though she bee
          One that loves mee.




_The Canonization._

  For Godsake hold your tongue, and let me love,
    Or chide my palsie, or my gout,
  My five gray haires, or ruin'd fortune flout,
    With wealth your state, your minde with Arts improve,
      Take you a course, get you a place,                            5
      Observe his honour, or his grace,
  Or the Kings reall, or his stamped face
    Contemplate, what you will, approve,
    So you will let me love.

  Alas, alas, who's injur'd by my love?                             10
    What merchants ships have my sighs drown'd?
  Who saies my teares have overflow'd his ground?
    When did my colds a forward spring remove?
      When did the heats which my veines fill
      Adde one more to the plaguie Bill?                            15
  Soldiers finde warres, and Lawyers finde out still
    Litigious men, which quarrels move,
    Though she and I do love.

  Call us what you will, wee are made such by love;
    Call her one, mee another flye,                                 20
  We'are Tapers too, and at our owne cost die,
    And wee in us finde the'Eagle and the Dove.
      The Phœnix ridle hath more wit
      By us, we two being one, are it.
  So to one neutrall thing both sexes fit,                          25
    Wee dye and rise the same, and prove
    Mysterious by this love.

  Wee can dye by it, if not live by love,
    And if unfit for tombes and hearse
  Our legend bee, it will be fit for verse;                         30
    And if no peece of Chronicle wee prove,
      We'll build in sonnets pretty roomes;
      As well a well wrought urne becomes
  The greatest ashes, as halfe-acre tombes,
    And by these hymnes, all shall approve                          35
    Us _Canoniz'd_ for Love:

  And thus invoke us; You whom reverend love
    Made one anothers hermitage;
  You, to whom love was peace, that now is rage;
    Who did the whole worlds soule contract, and drove              40
      Into the glasses of your eyes
      (So made such mirrors, and such spies,
  That they did all to you epitomize,)
    Countries, Townes, Courts: Beg from above
    A patterne of your love!                                        45




_The triple Foole._

    I am two fooles, I know,
  For loving, and for saying so
    In whining Poëtry;
  But where's that wiseman, that would not be I,
    If she would not deny?                                           5
  Then as th'earths inward narrow crooked lanes
  Do purge sea waters fretfull salt away,
    I thought, if I could draw my paines,
  Through Rimes vexation, I should them allay,
  Griefe brought to numbers cannot be so fierce,                    10
  For, he tames it, that fetters it in verse.

    But when I have done so,
  Some man, his art and voice to show,
    Doth Set and sing my paine,
  And, by delighting many, frees againe                             15
    Griefe, which verse did restraine.
  To Love, and Griefe tribute of Verse belongs,
  But not of such as pleases when'tis read,
    Both are increased by such songs:
  For both their triumphs so are published,                         20
  And I, which was two fooles, do so grow three;
  Who are a little wise, the best fooles bee.





_Lovers infinitenesse._

  If yet I have not all thy love,
  Deare, I shall never have it all,
  I cannot breath one other sigh, to move,
  Nor can intreat one other teare to fall,
  And all my treasure, which should purchase thee,                   5
  Sighs, teares, and oathes, and letters I have spent.
  Yet no more can be due to mee,
  Then at the bargaine made was ment,
  If then thy gift of love were partiall,
  That some to mee, some should to others fall,                     10
    Deare, I shall never have Thee All.

  Or if then thou gavest mee all,
  All was but All, which thou hadst then;
  But if in thy heart, since, there be or shall,
  New love created bee, by other men,                               15
  Which have their stocks intire, and can in teares,
  In sighs, in oathes, and letters outbid mee,
  This new love may beget new feares,
  For, this love was not vowed by thee.
  And yet it was, thy gift being generall,                          20
  The ground, thy heart is mine, what ever shall
    Grow there, deare, I should have it all.

  Yet I would not have all yet,
  Hee that hath all can have no more,
  And since my love doth every day admit                            25
  New growth, thou shouldst have new rewards in store;
  Thou canst not every day give me thy heart,
  If thou canst give it, then thou never gavest it:
  Loves riddles are, that though thy heart depart,
  It stayes at home, and thou with losing savest it:                30
  But wee will have a way more liberall,
  Then changing hearts, to joyne them, so wee shall
    Be one, and one anothers All.





_Song._

  Sweetest love, I do not goe,
    For wearinesse of thee,
  Nor in hope the world can show
    A fitter Love for mee;
      But since that I                                               5
  Must dye at last, 'tis best,
  To use my selfe in jest
    Thus by fain'd deaths to dye;

  Yesternight the Sunne went hence,
    And yet is here to day,                                         10
  He hath no desire nor sense,
    Nor halfe so short a way:
      Then feare not mee,
  But beleeve that I shall make
  Speedier journeyes, since I take                                  15
    More wings and spurres then hee.

  O how feeble is mans power,
    That if good fortune fall,
  Cannot adde another houre,
    Nor a lost houre recall!                                        20
      But come bad chance,
  And wee joyne to'it our strength,
  And wee teach it art and length,
    It selfe o'r us to'advance.

  When thou sigh'st, thou sigh'st not winde,                        25
    But sigh'st my soule away,
  When thou weep'st, unkindly kinde,
    My lifes blood doth decay.
      It cannot bee
  That thou lov'st mee, as thou say'st,                             30
  If in thine my life thou waste,
    Thou art the best of mee.

  Let not thy divining heart
    Forethinke me any ill,
  Destiny may take thy part,                                        35
    And may thy feares fulfill;
      But thinke that wee
  Are but turn'd aside to sleepe;
  They who one another keepe
    Alive, ne'r parted bee.                                         40





_The Legacie._

  When I dyed last, and, Deare, I dye
    As often as from thee I goe,
    Though it be but an houre agoe,
  And Lovers houres be full eternity,
  I can remember yet, that I                                         5
    Something did say, and something did bestow;
  Though I be dead, which sent mee, I should be
  Mine owne executor and Legacie.

  I heard mee say, Tell her anon,
    That my selfe, (that is you, not I,)                            10
    Did kill me, and when I felt mee dye,
  I bid mee send my heart, when I was gone,
  But I alas could there finde none,
    When I had ripp'd me,'and search'd where hearts did lye;
  It kill'd mee againe, that I who still was true,                  15
  In life, in my last Will should cozen you.

  Yet I found something like a heart,
    But colours it, and corners had,
    It was not good, it was not bad,
  It was intire to none, and few had part.                          20
  As good as could be made by art
    It seem'd; and therefore for our losses sad,
  I meant to send this heart in stead of mine,
  But oh, no man could hold it, for twas thine.





_A Feaver._

  Oh doe not die, for I shall hate
    All women so, when thou art gone,
  That thee I shall not celebrate,
    When I remember, thou wast one.

  But yet thou canst not die, I know;                                5
    To leave this world behinde, is death,
  But when thou from this world wilt goe,
    The whole world vapors with thy breath.

  Or if, when thou, the worlds soule, goest,
    It stay, tis but thy carkasse then,                             10
  The fairest woman, but thy ghost,
    But corrupt wormes, the worthyest men.

  O wrangling schooles, that search what fire
    Shall burne this world, had none the wit
  Unto this knowledge to aspire,                                    15
    That this her feaver might be it?

  And yet she cannot wast by this,
    Nor long beare this torturing wrong,
  For much corruption needfull is
    To fuell such a feaver long.                                    20

  These burning fits but meteors bee,
    Whose matter in thee is soone spent.
  Thy beauty,'and all parts, which are thee,
    Are unchangeable firmament.

  Yet t'was of my minde, seising thee,                              25
    Though it in thee cannot persever.
  For I had rather owner bee
    Of thee one houre, then all else ever.



_Aire and Angels._

  Twice or thrice had I loved thee,
  Before I knew thy face or name;
  So in a voice, so in a shapelesse flame,
  _Angells_ affect us oft, and worship'd bee;
    Still when, to where thou wert, I came,                          5
  Some lovely glorious nothing I did see.
    But since my soule, whose child love is,
  Takes limmes of flesh, and else could nothing doe,
    More subtile then the parent is,
  Love must not be, but take a body too,                            10
    And therefore what thou wert, and who,
        I bid Love aske, and now
  That it assume thy body, I allow,
  And fixe it selfe in thy lip, eye, and brow.

  Whilst thus to ballast love, I thought,                           15
  And so more steddily to have gone,
  With wares which would sinke admiration,
  I saw, I had loves pinnace overfraught,
    Ev'ry thy haire for love to worke upon
  Is much too much, some fitter must be sought;                     20
    For, nor in nothing, nor in things
  Extreme, and scatt'ring bright, can love inhere;
    Then as an Angell, face, and wings
  Of aire, not pure as it, yet pure doth weare,
    So thy love may be my loves spheare;                            25
        Just such disparitie
  As is twixt Aire and Angells puritie,
  'Twixt womens love, and mens will ever bee.




_Breake of day._

  'Tis true, 'tis day; what though it be?
  O wilt thou therefore rise from me?
  Why should we rise, because 'tis light?
  Did we lie downe, because 'twas night?
  Love which in spight of darknesse brought us hether,               5
  Should in despight of light keepe us together.

  Light hath no tongue, but is all eye;
  If it could speake as well as spie,
  This were the worst, that it could say,
  That being well, I faine would stay,                              10
  And that I lov'd my heart and honor so,
  That I would not from him, that had them, goe.

  Must businesse thee from hence remove?
  Oh, that's the worst disease of love,
  The poore, the foule, the false, love can                         15
  Admit, but not the busied man.
  He which hath businesse, and makes love, doth doe
  Such wrong, as when a maryed man doth wooe.



_The Anniversarie._

    All Kings, and all their favorites,
    All glory of honors, beauties, wits,
  The Sun it selfe, which makes times, as they passe,
  Is elder by a yeare, now, then it was
  When thou and I first one another saw:                             5
  All other things, to their destruction draw,
    Only our love hath no decay;
  This, no to morrow hath, nor yesterday,
  Running it never runs from us away,
  But truly keepes his first, last, everlasting day.                10

    Two graves must hide thine and my coarse,
    If one might, death were no divorce.
  Alas, as well as other Princes, wee,
  (Who Prince enough in one another bee,)
  Must leave at last in death, these eyes, and eares,               15
  Oft fed with true oathes, and with sweet salt teares;
    But soules where nothing dwells but love
  (All other thoughts being inmates) then shall prove
  This, or a love increased there above,
  When bodies to their graves, soules from their graves remove.     20

    And then wee shall be throughly blest,
    But wee no more, then all the rest;
  Here upon earth, we'are Kings, and none but wee
  Can be such Kings, nor of such subjects bee.
  Who is so safe as wee? where none can doe                         25
  Treason to us, except one of us two.
    True and false feares let us refraine,
  Let us love nobly, and live, and adde againe
  Yeares and yeares unto yeares, till we attaine
  To write threescore: this is the second of our raigne.            30



_A Valediction: of my name, in the window._


I.

  My name engrav'd herein,
  Doth contribute my firmnesse to this glasse,
    Which, ever since that charme, hath beene
    As hard, as that which grav'd it, was;
  Thine eye will give it price enough, to mock                       5
          The diamonds of either rock.


II.

          'Tis much that Glasse should bee
  As all confessing, and through-shine as I,
    'Tis more, that it shewes thee to thee,
    And cleare reflects thee to thine eye.                          10
  But all such rules, loves magique can undoe,
          Here you see mee, and I am you.


III.

          As no one point, nor dash,
  Which are but accessaries to this name,
    The showers and tempests can outwash,                           15
    So shall all times finde mee the same;
  You this intirenesse better may fulfill,
          Who have the patterne with you still.


IIII.

          Or, if too hard and deepe
  This learning be, for a scratch'd name to teach,                  20
    It, as a given deaths head keepe,
    Lovers mortalitie to preach,
  Or thinke this ragged bony name to bee
          My ruinous Anatomie.


V.

          Then, as all my soules bee,                               25
  Emparadis'd in you, (in whom alone
    I understand, and grow and see,)
    The rafters of my body, bone
  Being still with you, the Muscle, Sinew, and Veine,
          Which tile this house, will come againe.                  30


VI.

          Till my returne, repaire
  And recompact my scattered body so.
    As all the vertuous powers which are
    Fix'd in the starres, are said to flow
  Into such characters, as graved bee                               35
          When these starres have supremacie:


VII.

          So, since this name was cut
  When love and griefe their exaltation had,
    No doore 'gainst this names influence shut;
    As much more loving, as more sad,                               40
  'Twill make thee; and thou shouldst, till I returne,
          Since I die daily, daily mourne.


VIII.

          When thy inconsiderate hand
  Flings ope this casement, with my trembling name,
    To looke on one, whose wit or land,                             45
    New battry to thy heart may frame,
  Then thinke this name alive, and that thou thus
          In it offendst my Genius.


IX.

          And when thy melted maid,
  Corrupted by thy Lover's gold, and page,                          50
    His letter at thy pillow'hath laid,
    Disputed it, and tam'd thy rage,
  And thou begin'st to thaw towards him, for this,
          May my name step in, and hide his.


X.

          And if this treason goe                                   55
  To an overt act, and that thou write againe;
    In superscribing, this name flow
    Into thy fancy, from the pane.
  So, in forgetting thou remembrest right,
          And unaware to mee shalt write.                           60


XI.

          But glasse, and lines must bee,
  No meanes our firme substantiall love to keepe;
    Neere death inflicts this lethargie,
    And this I murmure in my sleepe;
  Impute this idle talke, to that I goe,                            65
          For dying men talke often so.



_Twicknam garden._

  Blasted with sighs, and surrounded with teares,
    Hither I come to seeke the spring,
    And at mine eyes, and at mine eares,
  Receive such balmes, as else cure every thing;
    But O, selfe traytor, I do bring                                 5
  The spider love, which transubstantiates all,
    And can convert Manna to gall,
  And that this place may thoroughly be thought
    True Paradise, I have the serpent brought.

  'Twere wholsomer for mee, that winter did                         10
    Benight the glory of this place,
    And that a grave frost did forbid
  These trees to laugh, and mocke mee to my face;
    But that I may not this disgrace
  Indure, nor yet leave loving, Love let mee                        15
    Some senslesse peece of this place bee;
  Make me a mandrake, so I may groane here,
    Or a stone fountaine weeping out my yeare.

  Hither with christall vyals, lovers come,
    And take my teares, which are loves wine,                       20
    And try your mistresse Teares at home,
  For all are false, that tast not just like mine;
    Alas, hearts do not in eyes shine,
  Nor can you more judge womans thoughts by teares,
    Then by her shadow, what she weares.                            25
  O perverse sexe, where none is true but shee,
    Who's therefore true, because her truth kills mee.



_A Valediction: of the booke._

  I'll tell thee now (deare Love) what thou shalt doe
    To anger destiny, as she doth us,
    How I shall stay, though she Esloygne me thus
  And how posterity shall know it too;
      How thine may out-endure                                       5
      Sybills glory, and obscure
      Her who from Pindar could allure,
    And her, through whose helpe _Lucan_ is not lame,
  And her, whose booke (they say) _Homer_ did finde, and name.

  Study our manuscripts, those Myriades                             10
    Of letters, which have past twixt thee and mee,
    Thence write our Annals, and in them will bee
  To all whom loves subliming fire invades,
      Rule and example found;
      There, the faith of any ground                                15
      No schismatique will dare to wound,
    That sees, how Love this grace to us affords,
  To make, to keep, to use, to be these his Records.

  This Booke, as long-liv'd as the elements,
    Or as the worlds forme, this all-graved tome                    20
    In cypher writ, or new made Idiome,
  Wee for loves clergie only'are instruments:
      When this booke is made thus,
      Should againe the ravenous
      Vandals and Goths inundate us,                                25
    Learning were safe; in this our Universe
  Schooles might learne Sciences, Spheares Musick, Angels Verse.

  Here Loves Divines, (since all Divinity
    Is love or wonder) may finde all they seeke,
    Whether abstract spirituall love they like,                     30
  Their Soules exhal'd with what they do not see,
      Or, loth so to amuze
      Faiths infirmitie, they chuse
      Something which they may see and use;
    For, though minde be the heaven, where love doth sit,           35
  Beauty a convenient type may be to figure it.

  Here more then in their bookes may Lawyers finde,
    Both by what titles Mistresses are ours,
    And how prerogative these states devours,
  Transferr'd from Love himselfe, to womankinde,                    40
      Who though from heart, and eyes,
      They exact great subsidies,
      Forsake him who on them relies,
    And for the cause, honour, or conscience give,
  Chimeraes, vaine as they, or their prerogative.                   45

  Here Statesmen, (or of them, they which can reade,)
    May of their occupation finde the grounds:
    Love and their art alike it deadly wounds,
  If to consider what 'tis, one proceed,
      In both they doe excell                                       50
      Who the present governe well,
      Whose weaknesse none doth, or dares tell;
    In this thy booke, such will their nothing see,
  As in the Bible some can finde out Alchimy.

  Thus vent thy thoughts; abroad I'll studie thee,                  55
    As he removes farre off, that great heights takes;
    How great love is, presence best tryall makes,
  But absence tryes how long this love will bee;
      To take a latitude
      Sun, or starres, are fitliest view'd                          60
      At their brightest, but to conclude
    Of longitudes, what other way have wee,
  But to marke when, and where the darke eclipses bee?



_Communitie._

  Good wee must love, and must hate ill,
  For ill is ill, and good good still,
    But there are things indifferent,
  Which wee may neither hate, nor love,
  But one, and then another prove,
    As wee shall finde our fancy bent.                               5

  If then at first wise Nature had
  Made women either good or bad,
    Then some wee might hate, and some chuse,
  But since shee did them so create,                                10
  That we may neither love, nor hate,
    Onely this rests, All, all may use.

  If they were good it would be seene,
  Good is as visible as greene,
    And to all eyes it selfe betrayes:                              15
  If they were bad, they could not last,
  Bad doth it selfe, and others wast,
    So, they deserve nor blame, nor praise.

  But they are ours as fruits are ours,
  He that but tasts, he that devours,                               20
    And he that leaves all, doth as well:
  Chang'd loves are but chang'd sorts of meat,
  And when hee hath the kernell eate,
    Who doth not fling away the shell?


_Loves growth._

  I scarce beleeve my love to be so pure
      As I had thought it was,
      Because it doth endure
  Vicissitude, and season, as the grasse;
  Me thinkes I lyed all winter, when I swore,                        5
  My love was infinite, if spring make'it more.

  But if this medicine, love, which cures all sorrow
  With more, not onely bee no quintessence,
  But mixt of all stuffes, paining soule, or sense,
  And of the Sunne his working vigour borrow,                       10
  Love's not so pure, and abstract, as they use
  To say, which have no Mistresse but their Muse,
  But as all else, being elemented too,
  Love sometimes would contemplate, sometimes do.

  And yet no greater, but more eminent,                             15
      Love by the spring is growne;
      As, in the firmament,
  Starres by the Sunne are not inlarg'd, but showne.
  Gentle love deeds, as blossomes on a bough,
  From loves awakened root do bud out now.                          20
  If, as in water stir'd more circles bee
  Produc'd by one, love such additions take,
  Those like so many spheares, but one heaven make,
  For, they are all concentrique unto thee.
  And though each spring doe adde to love new heate,                25
  As princes doe in times of action get
  New taxes, and remit them not in peace,
  No winter shall abate the springs encrease.



_Loves exchange._

  _Love_, any devill else but you,
  Would for a given Soule give something too.
  At Court your fellowes every day,
  Give th'art of Riming, Huntsmanship, or Play,
  For them which were their owne before;                             5
  Onely I have nothing which gave more,
  But am, alas, by being lowly, lower.

  I aske no dispensation now
  To falsifie a teare, or sigh, or vow,
  I do not sue from thee to draw                                    10
  A _non obstante_ on natures law,
  These are prerogatives, they inhere
  In thee and thine; none should forsweare
  Except that hee _Loves_ minion were.

  Give mee thy weaknesse, make mee blinde,                          15
  Both wayes, as thou and thine, in eies and minde;
  Love, let me never know that this
  Is love, or, that love childish is;
  Let me not know that others know
  That she knowes my paines, least that so                          20
  A tender shame make me mine owne new woe.

  If thou give nothing, yet thou'art just,
  Because I would not thy first motions trust;
  Small townes which stand stiffe, till great shot
  Enforce them, by warres law _condition_ not.                      25
  Such in loves warfare is my case,
  I may not article for grace,
  Having put Love at last to shew this face.

  This face, by which he could command
  And change the Idolatrie of any land,                             30
  This face, which wheresoe'r it comes,
  Can call vow'd men from cloisters, dead from tombes,
  And melt both Poles at once, and store
  Deserts with cities, and make more
  Mynes in the earth, then Quarries were before.                    35

  For this, Love is enrag'd with mee,
  Yet kills not. If I must example bee
  To future Rebells; If th'unborne
  Must learne, by my being cut up, and torne:
  Kill, and dissect me, Love; for this                              40
  Torture against thine owne end is,
  Rack't carcasses make ill Anatomies.




_Confined Love._

    Some man unworthy to be possessor
  Of old or new love, himselfe being false or weake,
    Thought his paine and shame would be lesser,
  If on womankind he might his anger wreake,
            And thence a law did grow,                               5
            One might but one man know;
            But are other creatures so?

    Are Sunne, Moone, or Starres by law forbidden,
  To smile where they list, or lend away their light?
    Are birds divorc'd, or are they chidden                         10
  If they leave their mate, or lie abroad a night?
            Beasts doe no joyntures lose
            Though they new lovers choose,
            But we are made worse then those.

    Who e'r rigg'd faire ship to lie in harbors,                    15
  And not to seeke new lands, or not to deale withall?
    Or built faire houses, set trees, and arbors,
  Only to lock up, or else to let them fall?
            Good is not good, unlesse
            A thousand it possesse,                                 20
            But doth wast with greedinesse.



_The Dreame._

  Deare love, for nothing lesse then thee
  Would I have broke this happy dreame,
            It was a theame
  For reason, much too strong for phantasie,
  Therefore thou wakd'st me wisely; yet                              5
  My Dreame thou brok'st not, but continued'st it,
  Thou art so truth, that thoughts of thee suffice,
  To make dreames truths; and fables histories;
  Enter these armes, for since thou thoughtst it best,
  Not to dreame all my dreame, let's act the rest.                  10

  As lightning, or a Tapers light,
  Thine eyes, and not thy noise wak'd mee;
            Yet I thought thee
  (For thou lovest truth) an Angell, at first sight,
  But when I saw thou sawest my heart,                              15
  And knew'st my thoughts, beyond an Angels art,
  When thou knew'st what I dreamt, when thou knew'st when
  Excesse of joy would wake me, and cam'st then,
  I must confesse, it could not chuse but bee
  Prophane, to thinke thee any thing but thee.                      20

  Comming and staying show'd thee, thee,
  But rising makes me doubt, that now,
            Thou art not thou.
  That love is weake, where feare's as strong as hee;
  'Tis not all spirit, pure, and brave,                             25
  If mixture it of _Feare_, _Shame_, _Honor_, have.
  Perchance as torches which must ready bee,
  Men light and put out, so thou deal'st with mee,
  Thou cam'st to kindle, goest to come; Then I
  Will dreame that hope againe, but else would die.                 30



_A Valediction: of weeping._

          Let me powre forth
  My teares before thy face, whil'st I stay here,
  For thy face coines them, and thy stampe they beare,
  And by this Mintage they are something worth,
          For thus they bee                                          5
          Pregnant of thee;
  Fruits of much griefe they are, emblemes of more,
  When a teare falls, that thou falst which it bore,
  So thou and I are nothing then, when on a divers shore.

          On a round ball                                           10
  A workeman that hath copies by, can lay
  An Europe, Afrique, and an Asia,
  And quickly make that, which was nothing, _All_,
          So doth each teare,
          Which thee doth weare,                                    15
  A globe, yea world by that impression grow,
  Till thy teares mixt with mine doe overflow
  This world, by waters sent from thee, my heaven dissolved so.

          O more then Moone,
  Draw not up seas to drowne me in thy spheare,                     20
  Weepe me not dead, in thine armes, but forbeare
  To teach the sea, what it may doe too soone;
          Let not the winde
          Example finde,
  To doe me more harme, then it purposeth;                          25
  Since thou and I sigh one anothers breath,
  Who e'r sighes most, is cruellest, and hasts the others death.


_Loves Alchymie._

  Some that have deeper digg'd loves Myne then I,
  Say, where his centrique happinesse doth lie:
          I have lov'd, and got, and told,
  But should I love, get, tell, till I were old,
  I should not finde that hidden mysterie;                           5
          Oh, 'tis imposture all:
  And as no chymique yet th'Elixar got,
          But glorifies his pregnant pot,
          If by the way to him befall
  Some odoriferous thing, or medicinall,                            10
    So, lovers dreame a rich and long delight,
    But get a winter-seeming summers night.

  Our ease, our thrift, our honor, and our day,
  Shall we, for this vaine Bubles shadow pay?
          Ends love in this, that my man,                           15
  Can be as happy'as I can; If he can
  Endure the short scorne of a Bridegroomes play?
          That loving wretch that sweares,
  'Tis not the bodies marry, but the mindes,
          Which he in her Angelique findes,                         20
          Would sweare as justly, that he heares,
  In that dayes rude hoarse minstralsey, the spheares.
    Hope not for minde in women; at their best
    Sweetnesse and wit, they'are but _Mummy_, possest.


_The Flea._

  Marke but this flea, and marke in this,
  How little that which thou deny'st me is;
  It suck'd me first, and now sucks thee,
  And in this flea, our two bloods mingled bee;
  Thou know'st that this cannot be said                              5
  A sinne, nor shame, nor losse of maidenhead,
    Yet this enjoyes before it wooe,
    And pamper'd swells with one blood made of two,
    And this, alas, is more then wee would doe.

  Oh stay, three lives in one flea spare,                           10
  Where wee almost, yea more then maryed are.
  This flea is you and I, and this
  Our mariage bed, and mariage temple is;
  Though parents grudge, and you, w'are met,
  And cloysterd in these living walls of Jet.                       15
    Though use make you apt to kill mee,
    Let not to that, selfe murder added bee,
    And sacrilege, three sinnes in killing three.

  Cruell and sodaine, hast thou since
  Purpled thy naile, in blood of innocence?                         20
  Wherein could this flea guilty bee,
  Except in that drop which it suckt from thee?
  Yet thou triumph'st, and saist that thou
  Find'st not thy selfe, nor mee the weaker now;
    'Tis true, then learne how false, feares bee;                   25
    Just so much honor, when thou yeeld'st to mee,
    Will wast, as this flea's death tooke life from thee.



_The Curse._

  Who ever guesses, thinks, or dreames he knowes
  Who is my mistris, wither by this curse;
        His only, and only his purse
        May some dull heart to love dispose,
  And shee yeeld then to all that are his foes;                      5
    May he be scorn'd by one, whom all else scorne,
    Forsweare to others, what to her he'hath sworne,
    With feare of missing, shame of getting, torne:

  Madnesse his sorrow, gout his cramp, may hee
  Make, by but thinking, who hath made him such:                    10
        And may he feele no touch
        Of conscience, but of fame, and bee
  Anguish'd, not that'twas sinne, but that'twas shee:
    In early and long scarcenesse may he rot,
    For land which had been his, if he had not                      15
    Himselfe incestuously an heire begot:

  May he dreame Treason, and beleeve, that hee
  Meant to performe it, and confesse, and die,
        And no record tell why:
        His sonnes, which none of his may bee,                      20
  Inherite nothing but his infamie:
    Or may he so long Parasites have fed,
    That he would faine be theirs, whom he hath bred,
    And at the last be circumcis'd for bread:

  The venom of all stepdames, gamsters gall,                        25
  What Tyrans, and their subjects interwish,
        What Plants, Mynes, Beasts, Foule, Fish,
        Can contribute, all ill which all
  Prophets, or Poets spake; And all which shall
    Be annex'd in schedules unto this by mee,                       30
    Fall on that man; For if it be a shee
    Nature before hand hath out-cursed mee.




_The Message._

  Send home my long strayd eyes to mee,
    Which (Oh) too long have dwelt on thee;
  Yet since there they have learn'd such ill,
      Such forc'd fashions,
      And false passions,                                            5
          That they be
          Made by thee
  Fit for no good sight, keep them still.

  Send home my harmlesse heart againe,
  Which no unworthy thought could staine;                           10
  But if it be taught by thine
      To make jestings
      Of protestings,
          And crosse both
          Word and oath,                                            15
  Keepe it, for then 'tis none of mine.

  Yet send me back my heart and eyes,
  That I may know, and see thy lyes,
  And may laugh and joy, when thou
      Art in anguish                                                20
      And dost languish
          For some one
          That will none,
  Or prove as false as thou art now.



_A nocturnall upon S._ Lucies _day,_

_Being the shortest day._

  Tis the yeares midnight, and it is the dayes,
  _Lucies_, who scarce seaven houres herself unmaskes,
    The Sunne is spent, and now his flasks
    Send forth light squibs, no constant rayes;
      The worlds whole sap is sunke:                                 5
  The generall balme th'hydroptique earth hath drunk,
  Whither, as to the beds-feet, life is shrunke,
  Dead and enterr'd; yet all these seeme to laugh,
  Compar'd with mee, who am their Epitaph.

  Study me then, you who shall lovers bee                           10
  At the next world, that is, at the next Spring:
    For I am every dead thing,
    In whom love wrought new Alchimie.
      For his art did expresse
  A quintessence even from nothingnesse,                            15
  From dull privations, and leane emptinesse:
  He ruin'd mee, and I am re-begot
  Of absence, darknesse, death; things which are not.

  All others, from all things, draw all that's good,
  Life, soule, forme, spirit, whence they beeing have;              20
    I, by loves limbecke, am the grave
    Of all, that's nothing. Oft a flood
      Have wee two wept, and so
  Drownd the whole world, us two; oft did we grow
  To be two Chaosses, when we did show                              25
  Care to ought else; and often absences
  Withdrew our soules, and made us carcasses.

  But I am by her death, (which word wrongs her)
  Of the first nothing, the Elixer grown;
    Were I a man, that I were one,                                  30
    I needs must know; I should preferre,
      If I were any beast,
  Some ends, some means; Yea plants, yea stones detest,
  And love; All, all some properties invest;
  If I an ordinary nothing were,                                    35
  As shadow, a light, and body must be here.

  But I am None; nor will my Sunne renew.
  You lovers, for whose sake, the lesser Sunne
    At this time to the Goat is runne
    To fetch new lust, and give it you,                             40
      Enjoy your summer all;
  Since shee enjoyes her long nights festivall,
  Let mee prepare towards her, and let mee call
  This houre her Vigill, and her Eve, since this
  Both the yeares, and the dayes deep midnight is.                  45



_Witchcraft by a picture._

  I fixe mine eye on thine, and there
    Pitty my picture burning in thine eye,
  My picture drown'd in a transparent teare,
    When I looke lower I espie;
      Hadst thou the wicked skill                                    5
  By pictures made and mard, to kill,
  How many wayes mightst thou performe thy will?

  But now I have drunke thy sweet salt teares,
    And though thou poure more I'll depart;
  My picture vanish'd, vanish feares,                               10
    That I can be endamag'd by that art;
      Though thou retaine of mee
  One picture more, yet that will bee,
  Being in thine owne heart, from all malice free.



_The Baite._

  Come live with mee, and bee my love,
  And wee will some new pleasures prove
  Of golden sands, and christall brookes,
  With silken lines, and silver hookes.

  There will the river whispering runne                              5
  Warm'd by thy eyes, more then the Sunne.
  And there the'inamor'd fish will stay,
  Begging themselves they may betray.

  When thou wilt swimme in that live bath,
  Each fish, which every channell hath,                             10
  Will amorously to thee swimme,
  Gladder to catch thee, then thou him.

  If thou, to be so seene, beest loath,
  By Sunne, or Moone, thou darknest both,
  And if my selfe have leave to see,                                15
  I need not their light, having thee.

  Let others freeze with angling reeds,
  And cut their legges, with shells and weeds,
  Or treacherously poore fish beset,
  With strangling snare, or windowie net:                           20

  Let coarse bold hands, from slimy nest
  The bedded fish in banks out-wrest,
  Or curious traitors, sleavesilke flies
  Bewitch poore fishes wandring eyes.

  For thee, thou needst no such deceit,                             25
  For thou thy selfe art thine owne bait;
  That fish, that is not catch'd thereby,
  Alas, is wiser farre then I.




_The Apparition._

  When by thy scorne, O murdresse, I am dead,
          And that thou thinkst thee free
  From all solicitation from mee,
  Then shall my ghost come to thy bed,
  And thee, fain'd vestall, in worse armes shall see;                5
  Then thy sicke taper will begin to winke,
  And he, whose thou art then, being tyr'd before,
  Will, if thou stirre, or pinch to wake him, thinke
          Thou call'st for more,
  And in false sleepe will from thee shrinke,                       10
  And then poore Aspen wretch, neglected thou
  Bath'd in a cold quicksilver sweat wilt lye
          A veryer ghost then I;
  What I will say, I will not tell thee now,
  Lest that preserve thee'; and since my love is spent,             15
  I'had rather thou shouldst painfully repent,
  Then by my threatnings rest still innocent.




_The broken heart._

  He is starke mad, who ever sayes,
    That he hath beene in love an houre,
  Yet not that love so soone decayes,
    But that it can tenne in lesse space devour;
  Who will beleeve mee, if I sweare                                  5
  That I have had the plague a yeare?
    Who would not laugh at mee, if I should say,
    I saw a flaske of _powder burne a day_?

  Ah, what a trifle is a heart,
    If once into loves hands it come!                               10
  All other griefes allow a part
    To other griefes, and aske themselves but some;
  They come to us, but us Love draws,
  Hee swallows us, and never chawes:
    By him, as by chain'd shot, whole rankes doe dye,               15
    He is the tyran Pike, our hearts the Frye.

  If 'twere not so, what did become
    Of my heart, when I first saw thee?
  I brought a heart into the roome,
    But from the roome, I carried none with mee:                    20
  If it had gone to thee, I know
  Mine would have taught thine heart to show
    More pitty unto mee: but Love, alas,
    At one first blow did shiver it as glasse.

  Yet nothing can to nothing fall,                                  25
    Nor any place be empty quite,
  Therefore I thinke my breast hath all
    Those peeces still, though they be not unite;
  And now as broken glasses show
  A hundred lesser faces, so                                        30
    My ragges of heart can like, wish, and adore,
    But after one such love, can love no more.




_A Valediction: forbidding mourning._

  As virtuous men passe mildly away,
    And whisper to their soules, to goe,
  Whilst some of their sad friends doe say,
    The breath goes now, and some say, no:

  So let us melt, and make no noise,                                 5
    No teare-floods, nor sigh-tempests move,
  T'were prophanation of our joyes
    To tell the layetie our love.

  Moving of th'earth brings harmes and feares,
    Men reckon what it did and meant,                               10
  But trepidation of the spheares,
    Though greater farre, is innocent.

  Dull sublunary lovers love
    (Whose soule is sense) cannot admit
  Absence, because it doth remove                                   15
    Those things which elemented it.

  But we by a love, so much refin'd,
    That our selves know not what it is,
  Inter-assured of the mind,
    Care lesse, eyes, lips, and hands to misse.                     20

  Our two soules therefore, which are one,
    Though I must goe, endure not yet
  A breach, but an expansion,
    Like gold to ayery thinnesse beate.

  If they be two, they are two so                                   25
    As stiffe twin compasses are two,
  Thy soule the fixt foot, makes no show
    To move, but doth, if the'other doe.

  And though it in the center sit,
    Yet when the other far doth rome,                               30
  It leanes, and hearkens after it,
    And growes erect, as that comes home.

  Such wilt thou be to mee, who must
    Like th'other foot, obliquely runne;
  Thy firmnes makes my circle just,
    And makes me end, where I begunne.                              35




_The Extasie._

  Where, like a pillow on a bed,
    A Pregnant banke swel'd up, to rest
  The violets reclining head,
    Sat we two, one anothers best.
  Our hands were firmely cimented                                    5
    With a fast balme, which thence did spring,
  Our eye-beames twisted, and did thred
    Our eyes, upon one double string;
  So to'entergraft our hands, as yet
    Was all the meanes to make us one,                              10
  And pictures in our eyes to get
    Was all our propagation.
  As 'twixt two equall Armies, Fate
    Suspends uncertaine victorie,
  Our soules, (which to advance their state,                        15
    Were gone out,) hung 'twixt her, and mee.
  And whil'st our soules negotiate there,
    Wee like sepulchrall statues lay;
  All day, the same our postures were,
    And wee said nothing, all the day.                              20
  If any, so by love refin'd,
    That he soules language understood,
  And by good love were growen all minde,
    Within convenient distance stood,
  He (though he knew not which soule spake,                         25
    Because both meant, both spake the same)
  Might thence a new concoction take,
    And part farre purer then he came.
  This Extasie doth unperplex
    (We said) and tell us what we love,                             30
  Wee see by this, it was not sexe,
    Wee see, we saw not what did move:
  But as all severall soules containe
    Mixture of things, they know not what,
  Love, these mixt soules, doth mixe againe,                        35
    And makes both one, each this and that.
  A single violet transplant,
    The strength, the colour, and the size,
  (All which before was poore, and scant,)
    Redoubles still, and multiplies.                                40
  When love, with one another so
    Interinanimates two soules,
  That abler soule, which thence doth flow,
    Defects of lonelinesse controules.
  Wee then, who are this new soule, know,                           45
    Of what we are compos'd, and made,
  For, th'Atomies of which we grow,
    Are soules, whom no change can invade.
  But O alas, so long, so farre
    Our bodies why doe wee forbeare?                                50
  They are ours, though they are not wee, Wee are
    The intelligences, they the spheare.
  We owe them thankes, because they thus,
    Did us, to us, at first convay,
  Yeelded their forces, sense, to us,                               55
    Nor are drosse to us, but allay.
  On man heavens influence workes not so,
    But that it first imprints the ayre,
  Soe soule into the soule may flow,
    Though it to body first repaire.                                60
  As our blood labours to beget
    Spirits, as like soules as it can,
  Because such fingers need to knit
    That subtile knot, which makes us man:
  So must pure lovers soules descend                                65
    T'affections, and to faculties,
  Which sense may reach and apprehend,
    Else a great Prince in prison lies.
  To'our bodies turne wee then, that so
    Weake men on love reveal'd may looke;                           70
  Loves mysteries in soules doe grow,
    But yet the body is his booke.
  And if some lover, such as wee,
    Have heard this dialogue of one,
  Let him still marke us, he shall see                              75
    Small change, when we'are to bodies gone.



_Loves Deitie._

  I long to talke with some old lovers ghost,
    Who dyed before the god of Love was borne:
  I cannot thinke that hee, who then lov'd most,
    Sunke so low, as to love one which did scorne.
  But since this god produc'd a destinie,                            5
  And that vice-nature, custome, lets it be;
    I must love her, that loves not mee.

  Sure, they which made him god, meant not so much,
    Nor he, in his young godhead practis'd it;
  But when an even flame two hearts did touch,                      10
    His office was indulgently to fit
  Actives to passives. Correspondencie
  Only his subject was; It cannot bee
    Love, till I love her, that loves mee.

  But every moderne god will now extend                             15
    His vast prerogative, as far as Jove.
  To rage, to lust, to write to, to commend,
    All is the purlewe of the God of Love.
  Oh were wee wak'ned by this Tyrannie
  To ungod this child againe, it could not bee                      20
    I should love her, who loves not mee.

  Rebell and Atheist too, why murmure I,
    As though I felt the worst that love could doe?
  Love might make me leave loving, or might trie
    A deeper plague, to make her love mee too,                      25
  Which, since she loves before, I'am loth to see;
  Falshood is worse then hate; and that must bee,
    If shee whom I love, should love mee.


_Loves diet._

  To what a combersome unwieldinesse
  And burdenous corpulence my love had growne,
    But that I did, to make it lesse,
    And keepe it in proportion,
  Give it a diet, made it feed upon                                  5
  That which love worst endures, _discretion_.

  Above one sigh a day I'allow'd him not,
  Of which my fortune, and my faults had part;
    And if sometimes by stealth he got
    A she sigh from my mistresse heart,                             10
  And thought to feast on that, I let him see
  'Twas neither very sound, nor meant to mee.

  If he wroung from mee'a teare, I brin'd it so
  With scorne or shame, that him it nourish'd not;
    If he suck'd hers, I let him know                               15
    'Twas not a teare, which hee had got,
  His drinke was counterfeit, as was his meat;
  For, eyes which rowle towards all, weepe not, but sweat.

  What ever he would dictate, I writ that,
  But burnt my letters; When she writ to me,                        20
    And that that favour made him fat,
    I said, if any title bee
  Convey'd by this, Ah, what doth it availe,
  To be the fortieth name in an entaile?

  Thus I reclaim'd my buzard love, to flye                          25
  At what, and when, and how, and where I chuse;
    Now negligent of sport I lye,
    And now as other Fawkners use,
  I spring a mistresse, sweare, write, sigh and weepe:
  And the game kill'd, or lost, goe talke, and sleepe.              30



_The Will._

      Before I sigh my last gaspe, let me breath,
      Great love, some Legacies; Here I bequeath
      Mine eyes to _Argus_, if mine eyes can see,
      If they be blinde, then Love, I give them thee;
      My tongue to Fame; to'Embassadours mine eares;                 5
        To women or the sea, my teares.
      Thou, Love, hast taught mee heretofore
    By making mee serve her who'had twenty more,
  That I should give to none, but such, as had too much before.

      My constancie I to the planets give;                          10
      My truth to them, who at the Court doe live;
      Mine ingenuity and opennesse,
      To Jesuites; to Buffones my pensivenesse;
      My silence to'any, who abroad hath beene;
        My mony to a Capuchin.                                      15
      Thou Love taught'st me, by appointing mee
    To love there, where no love receiv'd can be,
  Onely to give to such as have an incapacitie.

    My faith I give to Roman Catholiques;
    All my good works unto the Schismaticks                         20
    Of Amsterdam; my best civility
    And Courtship, to an Universitie;
    My modesty I give to souldiers bare;
      My patience let gamesters share.
    Thou Love taughtst mee, by making mee                           25
   Love her that holds my love disparity,
  Onely to give to those that count my gifts indignity.

    I give my reputation to those
    Which were my friends; Mine industrie to foes;
    To Schoolemen I bequeath my doubtfulnesse;                      30
    My sicknesse to Physitians, or excesse;
    To Nature, all that I in Ryme have writ;
      And to my company my wit.
    Thou Love, by making mee adore
   Her, who begot this love in mee before,                          35
  Taughtst me to make, as though I gave, when I did but restore.

    To him for whom the passing bell next tolls,
    I give my physick bookes; my writen rowles
    Of Morall counsels, I to Bedlam give;
    My brazen medals, unto them which live                          40
    In want of bread; To them which passe among
      All forrainers, mine English tongue.
    Thou, Love, by making mee love one
   Who thinkes her friendship a fit portion
  For yonger lovers, dost my gifts thus disproportion.              45

    Therefore I'll give no more; But I'll undoe
    The world by dying; because love dies too.
    Then all your beauties will bee no more worth
    Then gold in Mines, where none doth draw it forth;
    And all your graces no more use shall have                      50
      Then a Sun dyall in a grave.
    Thou Love taughtst mee, by making mee
   Love her, who doth neglect both mee and thee,
  To'invent, and practise this one way, to'annihilate all three.




_The Funerall._

  Who ever comes to shroud me, do not harme
         Nor question much
  That subtile wreath of haire, which crowns my arme;
  The mystery, the signe you must not touch,
         For 'tis my outward Soule,                                  5
  Viceroy to that, which then to heaven being gone,
         Will leave this to controule,
  And keepe these limbes, her Provinces, from dissolution.

  For if the sinewie thread my braine lets fall
         Through every part,                                        10
  Can tye those parts, and make mee one of all;
  These haires which upward grew, and strength and art
         Have from a better braine,
  Can better do'it; Except she meant that I
         By this should know my pain,                               15
  As prisoners then are manacled, when they'are condemn'd to die.

  What ere shee meant by'it, bury it with me,
        For since I am
  Loves martyr, it might breed idolatrie,
  If into others hands these Reliques came;                         20
        As'twas humility
  To afford to it all that a Soule can doe,
        So,'tis some bravery,
  That since you would save none of mee, I bury some of you.



_The Blossome._

    Little think'st thou, poore flower,
    Whom I have watch'd sixe or seaven dayes,
  And seene thy birth, and seene what every houre
  Gave to thy growth, thee to this height to raise,
  And now dost laugh and triumph on this bough,                      5
              Little think'st thou
  That it will freeze anon, and that I shall
  To morrow finde thee falne, or not at all.

    Little think'st thou poore heart
    That labour'st yet to nestle thee,                              10
  And think'st by hovering here to get a part
  In a forbidden or forbidding tree,
  And hop'st her stiffenesse by long siege to bow:
              Little think'st thou,
  That thou to morrow, ere that Sunne doth wake,                    15
  Must with this Sunne, and mee a journey take.

    But thou which lov'st to bee
    Subtile to plague thy selfe, wilt say,
  Alas, if you must goe, what's that to mee?
  Here lyes my businesse, and here I will stay:                     20
  You goe to friends, whose love and meanes present
              Various content
  To your eyes, eares, and tongue, and every part.
  If then your body goe, what need you a heart?

    Well then, stay here; but know,                                 25
    When thou hast stayd and done thy most;
  A naked thinking heart, that makes no show,
  Is to a woman, but a kinde of Ghost;
  How shall shee know my heart; or having none,
              Know thee for one?                                    30
  Practise may make her know some other part,
  But take my word, shee doth not know a Heart.

    Meet mee at London, then,
    Twenty dayes hence, and thou shalt see
  Mee fresher, and more fat, by being with men,                     35
  Then if I had staid still with her and thee.
  For Gods sake, if you can, be you so too:
              I would give you
  There, to another friend, whom wee shall finde
  As glad to have my body, as my minde.                             40



_The Primrose, being at Montgomery Castle, upon the hill, on which it
is situate._

        Vpon this Primrose hill,
        Where, if Heav'n would distill
  A shoure of raine, each severall drop might goe
  To his owne primrose, and grow Manna so;
  And where their forme, and their infinitie                         5
        Make a terrestriall Galaxie,
        As the small starres doe in the skie:
  I walke to finde a true Love; and I see
  That'tis not a mere woman, that is shee,
  But must, or more, or lesse then woman bee.                       10

        Yet know I not, which flower
        I wish; a sixe, or foure;
  For should my true-Love lesse then woman bee,
  She were scarce any thing; and then, should she
  Be more then woman, shee would get above                          15
        All thought of sexe, and thinke to move
        My heart to study her, and not to love;
  Both these were monsters; Since there must reside
  Falshood in woman, I could more abide,
  She were by art, then Nature falsify'd.                           20

        Live Primrose then, and thrive
        With thy true number five;
  And women, whom this flower doth represent,
  With this mysterious number be content;
  Ten is the farthest number; if halfe ten                          25
        Belonge unto each woman, then
        Each woman may take halfe us men;
  Or if this will not serve their turne, Since all
  Numbers are odde, or even, and they fall
  First into this, five, women may take us all.                     30



_The Relique._

        When my grave is broke up againe
        Some second ghest to entertaine,
        (For graves have learn'd that woman-head
        To be to more then one a Bed)
            And he that digs it, spies                               5
  A bracelet of bright haire about the bone,
            Will he not let'us alone,
  And thinke that there a loving couple lies,
  Who thought that this device might be some way
  To make their soules, at the last busie day,                      10
  Meet at this grave, and make a little stay?

        If this fall in a time, or land,
        Where mis-devotion doth command,
        Then, he that digges us up, will bring
        Us, to the Bishop, and the King,                            15
            To make us Reliques; then
  Thou shalt be a Mary Magdalen, and I
            A something else thereby;
  All women shall adore us, and some men;
  And since at such time, miracles are sought,                      20
  I would have that age by this paper taught
  What miracles wee harmelesse lovers wrought.

        First, we lov'd well and faithfully,
        Yet knew not what wee lov'd, nor why,
        Difference of sex no more wee knew,                         25
        Then our Guardian Angells doe;
            Comming and going, wee
  Perchance might kisse, but not between those meales;
            Our hands ne'r toucht the seales,
  Which nature, injur'd by late law, sets free:                     30
  These miracles wee did; but now alas,
  All measure, and all language, I would passe,
  Should I tell what a miracle shee was.


_The Dampe._

  When I am dead, and Doctors know not why,
          And my friends curiositie
  Will have me cut up to survay each part,
  When they shall finde your Picture in my heart,
        You thinke a sodaine dampe of love                           5
        Will through all their senses move,
  And worke on them as mee, and so preferre
  Your murder, to the name of Massacre.

  Poore victories! But if you dare be brave,
            And pleasure in your conquest have,                     10
  First kill th'enormous Gyant, your _Disdaine_,
  And let th'enchantresse _Honor_, next be slaine,
          And like a Goth and Vandall rize,
          Deface Records, and Histories
  Of your owne arts and triumphs over men,                          15
  And without such advantage kill me then.

  For I could muster up as well as you
            My Gyants, and my Witches too,
  Which are vast _Constancy_, and _Secretnesse_,
  But these I neyther looke for, nor professe;                      20
          Kill mee as Woman, let mee die
          As a meere man; doe you but try
  Your passive valor, and you shall finde than,
  In that you'have odds enough of any man.




_The Dissolution._

    Shee'is dead; And all which die
    To their first Elements resolve;
  And wee were mutuall Elements to us,
        And made of one another.
    My body then doth hers involve,                                  5
  And those things whereof I consist, hereby
  In me abundant grow, and burdenous,
        And nourish not, but smother.
    My fire of Passion, sighes of ayre,
  Water of teares, and earthly sad despaire,                        10
              Which my materialls bee,
  But neere worne out by loves securitie,
  Shee, to my losse, doth by her death repaire,
    And I might live long wretched so
  But that my fire doth with my fuell grow.                         15
          Now as those Active Kings
    Whose foraine conquest treasure brings,
  Receive more, and spend more, and soonest breake:
  This (which I am amaz'd that I can speake)
          This death, hath with my store                            20
              My use encreas'd.
  And so my soule more earnestly releas'd,
  Will outstrip hers; As bullets flowen before
  A latter bullet may o'rtake, the pouder being more.


_A Ieat Ring Sent._

    Thou art not so black, as my heart,
      Nor halfe so brittle, as her heart, thou art;
  What would'st thou say? shall both our properties by thee bee spoke,
    Nothing more endlesse, nothing sooner broke?

        Marriage rings are not of this stuffe;                       5
    Oh, why should ought lesse precious, or lesse tough
  Figure our loves? Except in thy name thou have bid it say,
    I'am cheap, and nought but fashion, fling me'away.

        Yet stay with mee since thou art come,
    Circle this fingers top, which did'st her thombe.               10
  Be justly proud, and gladly safe, that thou dost dwell with me,
    She that, Oh, broke her faith, would soon breake thee.



_Negative love._

  I never stoop'd so low, as they
  Which on an eye, cheeke, lip, can prey,
    Seldome to them, which soare no higher
    Then vertue or the minde to'admire,
  For sense, and understanding may                                   5
    Know, what gives fuell to their fire:
  My love, though silly, is more brave,
  For may I misse, when ere I crave,
  If I know yet, what I would have.

  If that be simply perfectest                                      10
  Which can by no way be exprest
    But _Negatives_, my love is so.
    To All, which all love, I say no.
  If any who deciphers best,
    What we know not, our selves, can know,                         15
  Let him teach mee that nothing; This
  As yet my ease, and comfort is,
  Though I speed not, I cannot misse.



_The Prohibition._

            Take heed of loving mee,
  At least remember, I forbade it thee;
  Not that I shall repaire my'unthrifty wast
  Of Breath and Blood, upon thy sighes, and teares,
  By being to thee then what to me thou wast;                        5
  But, so great Joy, our life at once outweares,
  Then, least thy love, by my death, frustrate bee,
  If thou love mee, take heed of loving mee.

            Take heed of hating mee,
  Or too much triumph in the Victorie.                              10
  Not that I shall be mine owne officer,
  And hate with hate againe retaliate;
  But thou wilt lose the stile of conquerour,
  If I, thy conquest, perish by thy hate.
  Then, least my being nothing lessen thee,                         15
  If thou hate mee, take heed of hating mee.

            Yet, love and hate mee too,
  So, these extreames shall neithers office doe;
  Love mee, that I may die the gentler way;
  Hate mee, because thy love is too great for mee;                  20
  Or let these two, themselves, not me decay;
  So shall I, live, thy Stage, not triumph bee;
  Lest thou thy love and hate and mee undoe,
  _To let mee live, O love and hate mee too._



_The Expiration._

  So, so, breake off this last lamenting kisse,
    Which sucks two soules, and vapors Both away,
  Turne thou ghost that way, and let mee turne this,
    And let our selves benight our happiest day,
  We ask'd none leave to love; nor will we owe                       5
    Any, so cheape a death, as saying, Goe;

  Goe; and if that word have not quite kil'd thee,
    Ease mee with death, by bidding mee goe too.
  Oh, if it have, let my word worke on mee,
    And a just office on a murderer doe.                            10
  Except it be too late, to kill me so,
    Being double dead, going, and bidding, goe.






_The Computation._

  For the first twenty yeares, since yesterday,
    I scarce beleev'd, thou could'st be gone away,
  For forty more, I fed on favours past,
    And forty'on hopes, that thou would'st, they might last.
  Teares drown'd one hundred, and sighes blew out two,               5
    A thousand, I did neither thinke, nor doe,
    Or not divide, all being one thought of you;
    Or in a thousand more, forgot that too.
  Yet call not this long life; But thinke that I
  Am, by being dead, Immortall; Can ghosts die?                     10



_The Paradox._

  No Lover saith, I love, nor any other
        Can judge a perfect Lover;
  Hee thinkes that else none can, nor will agree
        That any loves but hee:
  I cannot say I lov'd, for who can say                              5
        Hee was kill'd yesterday?
  Love with excesse of heat, more yong then old,
        Death kills with too much cold;
  Wee dye but once, and who lov'd last did die,
        Hee that saith twice, doth lye:                             10
  For though hee seeme to move, and stirre a while,
        It doth the sense beguile.
  Such life is like the light which bideth yet
        When the lights life is set,
  Or like the heat, which fire in solid matter                      15
        Leaves behinde, two houres after.
  Once I lov'd and dy'd; and am now become
        Mine Epitaph and Tombe.
  Here dead men speake their last, and so do I;
        Love-slaine, loe, here I lye.                               20


_Farewell to Love._

        Whilst yet to prove,
  I thought there was some Deitie in love
    So did I reverence, and gave
  Worship; as Atheists at their dying houre
  Call, what they cannot name, an unknowne power,                    5
    As ignorantly did I crave:
            Thus when
  Things not yet knowne are coveted by men,
    Our desires give them fashion, and so
  As they waxe lesser, fall, as they sise, grow.                    10

        But, from late faire
  His hignesse sitting in a golden Chaire,
    Is not lesse cared for after three dayes
  By children, then the thing which lovers so
  Blindly admire, and with such worship wooe;                       15
    Being had, enjoying it decayes:
            And thence,
  What before pleas'd them all, takes but one sense,
    And that so lamely, as it leaves behinde
  A kinde of sorrowing dulnesse to the minde.                       20

        Ah cannot wee,
  As well as Cocks and Lyons jocund be,
    After such pleasures? Unlesse wise
  Nature decreed (since each such Act, they say,
  Diminisheth the length of life a day)                             25
    This, as shee would man should despise
            The sport;
  Because that other curse of being short,
    And onely for a minute made to be,
  (Eagers desire) to raise posterity.                               30

        Since so, my minde
  Shall not desire what no man else can finde,
    I'll no more dote and runne
  To pursue things which had indammag'd me.
  And when I come where moving beauties be,                         35
    As men doe when the summers Sunne
            Growes great,
  Though I admire their greatnesse, shun their heat;
    Each place can afford shadowes. If all faile,
  'Tis but applying worme-seed to the Taile.                        40


_A Lecture upon the Shadow._

  Stand still, and I will read to thee
  A Lecture, Love, in loves philosophy.
      These three houres that we have spent,
      Walking here, Two shadowes went
  Along with us, which we our selves produc'd;                       5
  But, now the Sunne is just above our head,
      We doe those shadowes tread;
      And to brave clearnesse all things are reduc'd.
    So whilst our infant loves did grow,
    Disguises did, and shadowes, flow,                              10
    From us, and our cares; but, now 'tis not so.

  That love hath not attain'd the high'st degree,
  Which is still diligent lest others see.

  Except our loves at this noone stay,
  We shall new shadowes make the other way.                         15
      As the first were made to blinde
      Others; these which come behinde
  Will worke upon our selves, and blind our eyes.
  If our loves faint, and westwardly decline;
      To me thou, falsly, thine,                                    20
      And I to thee mine actions shall disguise.
    The morning shadowes weare away,
    But these grow longer all the day,
    But oh, loves day is short, if love decay.

  Love is a growing, or full constant light;                        25
  And his first minute, after noone, is night.



_Sonnet. The Token._

  Send me some token, that my hope may live,
    Or that my easelesse thoughts may sleep and rest;
  Send me some honey to make sweet my hive,
    That in my passion I may hope the best.
  I beg noe ribbond wrought with thine owne hands,                   5
    To knit our loves in the fantastick straine
  Of new-toucht youth; nor Ring to shew the stands
    Of our affection, that as that's round and plaine,
  So should our loves meet in simplicity;
    No, nor the Coralls which thy wrist infold,                     10
  Lac'd up together in congruity,
    To shew our thoughts should rest in the same hold;
  No, nor thy picture, though most gracious,
    And most desir'd, because best like the best;
  Nor witty Lines, which are most copious,                          15
    Within the Writings which thou hast addrest.

    Send me nor this, nor that, t'increase my store,
    But swear thou thinkst I love thee, and no more.



<_Selfe Love._>

  He that cannot chuse but love,
  And strives against it still,
  Never shall my fancy move;
  For he loves 'gaynst his will;
  Nor he which is all his own,                                       5
  And can att pleasure chuse,
  When I am caught he can be gone,
  And when he list refuse.
  Nor he that loves none but faire,
  For such by all are sought;                                       10
  Nor he that can for foul ones care,
  For his Judgement then is nought:
  Nor he that hath wit, for he
  Will make me his jest or slave;
  Nor a fool, for when others...,                                   15
  He can neither....
  Nor he that still his Mistresse payes,
  For she is thrall'd therefore:
  Nor he that payes not, for he sayes
  Within, shee's worth no more.                                     20
  Is there then no kinde of men
  Whom I may freely prove?
  I will vent that humour then
  In mine own selfe love.



_Hero_ and _Leander_.

  Both rob'd of aire, we both lye in one ground,
  Both whom one fire had burnt, one water drownd.





_Pyramus_ and _Thisbe_.

  Two, by themselves, each other, love and feare
  Slaine, cruell friends, by parting have joyn'd here.





_Niobe._

  By childrens births, and death, I am become
  So dry, that I am now mine owne sad tombe.





_A burnt ship._

  Out of a fired ship, which, by no way
  But drowning, could be rescued from the flame,
  Some men leap'd forth, and ever as they came
  Neere the foes ships, did by their shot decay;
  So all were lost, which in the ship were found,
  They in the sea being burnt, they in the burnt ship drown'd.



_Fall of a wall._

  Vnder an undermin'd, and shot-bruis'd wall
  A too-bold Captaine perish'd by the fall,
  Whose brave misfortune, happiest men envi'd,
  That had a towne for tombe, his bones to hide.






_A lame begger._

  I am unable, yonder begger cries,
  To stand, or move; if he say true, hee _lies_.




_Cales_ and _Guyana_.

  If you from spoyle of th'old worlds farthest end
  To the new world your kindled valors bend,
  What brave examples then do prove it trew
  That one things end doth still beginne a new.




_Sir Iohn Wingefield._

  Beyond th'old Pillers many have travailed
  Towards the Suns cradle, and his throne, and bed:
  A fitter Piller our Earle did bestow
  In that late Island; for he well did know
  Farther then Wingefield no man dares to goe.




_A selfe accuser._

  Your mistris, that you follow whores, still taxeth you:
  'Tis strange that she should thus confesse it, though'it be true.






_A licentious person._

  Thy sinnes and haires may no man equall call,
  For, as thy sinnes increase, thy haires doe fall.





_Antiquary._

  If in his Studie he hath so much care
  To'hang all old strange things, let his wife beware.




_Disinherited._

  Thy father all from thee, by his last Will,
  Gave to the poore; Thou hast good title still.




_Phryne._

  Thy flattering picture, _Phryne_, is like thee,
  Onely in this, that you both painted be.





_An obscure writer._

  _Philo_, with twelve yeares study, hath beene griev'd
  To be understood; when will hee be beleev'd?




_Klockius._

  _Klockius_ so deeply hath sworne, ne'r more to come
  In bawdie house, that hee dares not goe home.


_Raderus._

  Why this man gelded _Martiall_ I muse,
  Except himselfe alone his tricks would use,
  As _Katherine_, for the Courts sake, put downe Stewes.



_Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus._

  Like _Esops_ fellow-slaves, O _Mercury_,
  Which could do all things, thy faith is; and I
  Like _Esops_ selfe, which nothing; I confesse
  I should have had more faith, if thou hadst lesse;
  Thy credit lost thy credit: 'Tis sinne to doe,
  In this case, as thou wouldst be done unto,
  To beleeve all: Change thy name: thou art like
  _Mercury_ in stealing, but lyest like a _Greeke_.




_Ralphius._

  Compassion in the world againe is bred:
  _Ralphius_ is sick, the broker keeps his bed.



_The Lier._

  Thou in the fields walkst out thy supping howers,
  And yet thou swear'st thou hast supp'd like a king:
  Like Nebuchadnezar perchance with grass and flowers,
  A sallet worse then Spanish dieting.



ELEGIE I.

_Iealosie._

  Fond woman, which would'st have thy husband die,
  And yet complain'st of his great jealousie;
  If swolne with poyson, hee lay in' his last bed,
  His body with a sere-barke covered,
  Drawing his breath, as thick and short, as can                     5
  The nimblest crocheting Musitian,
  Ready with loathsome vomiting to spue
  His Soule out of one hell, into a new,
  Made deafe with his poore kindreds howling cries,
  Begging with few feign'd teares, great legacies,                  10
  Thou would'st not weepe, but jolly,'and frolicke bee,
  As a slave, which to morrow should be free;
  Yet weep'st thou, when thou seest him hungerly
  Swallow his owne death, hearts-bane jealousie.
  O give him many thanks, he'is courteous,                          15
  That in suspecting kindly warneth us.
  Wee must not, as wee us'd, flout openly,
  In scoffing ridles, his deformitie;
  Nor at his boord together being fatt,
  With words, nor touch, scarce lookes adulterate.                  20
  Nor when he swolne, and pamper'd with great fare,
  Sits downe, and snorts, cag'd in his basket chaire,
  Must wee usurpe his owne bed any more,
  Nor kisse and play in his house, as before.
  Now I see many dangers; for that is                               25
  His realme, his castle, and his diocesse.
  But if, as envious men, which would revile
  Their Prince, or coyne his gold, themselves exile
  Into another countrie,'and doe it there,
  Wee play'in another house, what should we feare?                  30
  There we will scorne his houshold policies,
  His seely plots, and pensionary spies,
  As the inhabitants of Thames right side
  Do Londons Major; or Germans, the Popes pride.



ELEGIE II.

_The Anagram._

  Marry, and love thy _Flavia_, for, shee
  Hath all things, whereby others beautious bee,
  For, though her eyes be small, her mouth is great,
  Though they be Ivory, yet her teeth be jeat,
  Though they be dimme, yet she is light enough,                     5
  And though her harsh haire fall, her skinne is rough;
  What though her cheeks be yellow, her haire's red,
  Give her thine, and she hath a maydenhead.
  These things are beauties elements, where these
  Meet in one, that one must, as perfect, please.                   10
  If red and white and each good quality
  Be in thy wench, ne'r aske where it doth lye.
  In buying things perfum'd, we aske; if there
  Be muske and amber in it, but not where.
  Though all her parts be not in th'usuall place,                   15
  She'hath yet an Anagram of a good face.
  If we might put the letters but one way,
  In the leane dearth of words, what could wee say?
  When by the Gamut some Musitions make
  A perfect song, others will undertake,                            20
  By the same Gamut chang'd, to equall it.
  Things simply good, can never be unfit.
  She's faire as any, if all be like her,
  And if none bee, then she is singular.
  All love is wonder; if wee justly doe                             25
  Account her wonderfull, why not lovely too?
  Love built on beauty, soone as beauty, dies,
  Chuse this face, chang'd by no deformities.
  Women are all like Angels; the faire be
  Like those which fell to worse; but such as shee,                 30
  Like to good Angels, nothing can impaire:
  'Tis lesse griefe to be foule, then to have beene faire.
  For one nights revels, silke and gold we chuse,
  But, in long journeyes, cloth, and leather use.
  Beauty is barren oft; best husbands say,                          35
  There is best land, where there is foulest way.
  Oh what a soveraigne Plaister will shee bee,
  If thy past sinnes have taught thee jealousie!
  Here needs no spies, nor eunuches; her commit
  Safe to thy foes; yea, to a Marmosit.                             40
  When Belgiaes citties, the round countries drowne,
  That durty foulenesse guards, and armes the towne:
  So doth her face guard her; and so, for thee,
  Which, forc'd by businesse, absent oft must bee,
  Shee, whose face, like clouds, turnes the day to night,           45
  Who, mightier then the sea, makes Moores seem white,
  Who, though seaven yeares, she in the Stews had laid,
  A Nunnery durst receive, and thinke a maid,
  And though in childbeds labour she did lie,
  Midwifes would sweare, 'twere but a tympanie,                     50
  Whom, if shee accuse her selfe, I credit lesse
  Then witches, which impossibles confesse,
  Whom Dildoes, Bedstaves, and her Velvet Glasse
  Would be as loath to touch as Joseph was:
  One like none, and lik'd of none, fittest were,                   55
  For, things in fashion every man will weare.



ELEGIE III.

_Change._

  Although thy hand and faith, and good workes too,
  Have seal'd thy love which nothing should undoe,
  Yea though thou fall backe, that apostasie
  Confirme thy love; yet much, much I feare thee.
  Women are like the Arts, forc'd unto none,                         5
  Open to'all searchers, unpriz'd, if unknowne.
  If I have caught a bird, and let him flie,
  Another fouler using these meanes, as I,
  May catch the same bird; and, as these things bee,
  Women are made for men, not him, nor mee.                         10
  Foxes and goats; all beasts change when they please,
  Shall women, more hot, wily, wild then these,
  Be bound to one man, and did Nature then
  Idly make them apter to'endure then men?
  They'are our clogges, not their owne; if a man bee                15
  Chain'd to a galley, yet the galley'is free;
  Who hath a plow-land, casts all his seed corne there,
  And yet allowes his ground more corne should beare;
  Though Danuby into the sea must flow,
  The sea receives the Rhene, Volga, and Po.                        20
  By nature, which gave it, this liberty
  Thou lov'st, but Oh! canst thou love it and mee?
  Likenesse glues love: and if that thou so doe,
  To make us like and love, must I change too?
  More then thy hate, I hate'it, rather let mee                     25
  Allow her change, then change as oft as shee,
  And soe not teach, but force my'opinion
  To love not any one, nor every one.
  To live in one land, is captivitie,
  To runne all countries, a wild roguery;                           30
  Waters stincke soone, if in one place they bide,
  And in the vast sea are more putrifi'd:
  But when they kisse one banke, and leaving this
  Never looke backe, but the next banke doe kisse,
  Then are they purest; Change'is the nursery                       35
  Of musicke, joy, life, and eternity.



ELEGIE IV.

_The Perfume._

  Once, and but once found in thy company,
  All thy suppos'd escapes are laid on mee;
  And as a thiefe at barre, is question'd there
  By all the men, that have beene rob'd that yeare,
  So am I, (by this traiterous meanes surpriz'd)                     5
  By thy Hydroptique father catechiz'd.
  Though he had wont to search with glazed eyes,
  As though he came to kill a Cockatrice,
  Though hee hath oft sworne, that hee would remove
  Thy beauties beautie, and food of our love,                       10
  Hope of his goods, if I with thee were seene,
  Yet close and secret, as our soules, we'have beene.
  Though thy immortall mother which doth lye
  Still buried in her bed, yet will not dye,
  Takes this advantage to sleepe out day-light,                     15
  And watch thy entries, and returnes all night,
  And, when she takes thy hand, and would seeme kind,
  Doth search what rings, and armelets she can finde,
  And kissing notes the colour of thy face,
  And fearing least thou'art swolne, doth thee embrace;             20
  To trie if thou long, doth name strange meates,
  And notes thy palenesse, blushing, sighs, and sweats;
  And politiquely will to thee confesse
  The sinnes of her owne youths ranke lustinesse;
  Yet love these Sorceries did remove, and move                     25
  Thee to gull thine owne mother for my love.
  Thy little brethren, which like Faiery Sprights
  Oft skipt into our chamber, those sweet nights,
  And kist, and ingled on thy fathers knee,
  Were brib'd next day, to tell what they did see:                  30
  The grim eight-foot-high iron-bound serving-man,
  That oft names God in oathes, and onely than,
  He that to barre the first gate, doth as wide
  As the great Rhodian Colossus stride,
  Which, if in hell no other paines there were,                     35
  Makes mee feare hell, because he must be there:
  Though by thy father he were hir'd to this,
  Could never witnesse any touch or kisse.
  But Oh, too common ill, I brought with mee
  That, which betray'd mee to my enemie:                            40
  A loud perfume, which at my entrance cryed
  Even at thy fathers nose, so were wee spied.
  When, like a tyran King, that in his bed
  Smelt gunpowder, the pale wretch shivered.
  Had it beene some bad smell, he would have thought                45
  That his owne feet, or breath, that smell had wrought.
  But as wee in our Ile emprisoned,
  Where cattell onely,'and diverse dogs are bred,
  The pretious Vnicornes, strange monsters call,
  So thought he good, strange, that had none at all.                50
  I taught my silkes, their whistling to forbeare,
  Even my opprest shoes, dumbe and speechlesse were,
  Onely, thou bitter sweet, whom I had laid
  Next mee, mee traiterously hast betraid,
  And unsuspected hast invisibly                                    55
  At once fled unto him, and staid with mee.
  Base excrement of earth, which dost confound
  Sense, from distinguishing the sicke from sound;
  By thee the seely Amorous sucks his death
  By drawing in a leprous harlots breath;                           60
  By thee, the greatest staine to mans estate
  Falls on us, to be call'd effeminate;
  Though you be much lov'd in the Princes hall,
  There, things that seeme, exceed substantiall;
  Gods, when yee fum'd on altars, were pleas'd well                 65
  Because you'were burnt, not that they lik'd your smell;
  You'are loathsome all, being taken simply alone,
  Shall wee love ill things joyn'd, and hate each one?
  If you were good, your good doth soone decay;
  And you are rare, that takes the good away.                       70
  All my perfumes, I give most willingly
  To'embalme thy fathers corse; What? will hee die?


ELEGIE V.

_His Picture._

  Here take my Picture; though I bid farewell,
  Thine, in my heart, where my soule dwels, shall dwell.
  'Tis like me now, but I dead, 'twill be more
  When wee are shadowes both, then'twas before.
  When weather-beaten I come backe; my hand,                         5
  Perhaps with rude oares torne, or Sun beams tann'd,
  My face and brest of hairecloth, and my head
  With cares rash sodaine stormes, being o'rspread,
  My body'a sack of bones, broken within,
  And powders blew staines scatter'd on my skinne;                  10
  If rivall fooles taxe thee to'have lov'd a man,
  So foule, and course, as, Oh, I may seeme than,
  This shall say what I was: and thou shalt say,
  Doe his hurts reach mee? doth my worth decay?
  Or doe they reach his judging minde, that hee                     15
  Should now love lesse, what hee did love to see?
  That which in him was faire and delicate,
  Was but the milke, which in loves childish state
  Did nurse it: who now is growne strong enough
  To feed on that, which to disused tasts seemes tough.             20


ELEGIE VI.

  Oh, let mee not serve so, as those men serve
  Whom honours smoakes at once fatten and sterve;
  Poorely enrich't with great mens words or lookes;
  Nor so write my name in thy loving bookes
  As those Idolatrous flatterers, which still                        5
  Their Princes stiles, with many Realmes fulfill
  Whence they no tribute have, and where no sway.
  Such services I offer as shall pay
  Themselves, I hate dead names: Oh then let mee
  Favorite in Ordinary, or no favorite bee.                         10
  When my Soule was in her owne body sheath'd,
  Nor yet by oathes betroth'd, nor kisses breath'd
  Into my Purgatory, faithlesse thee,
  Thy heart seem'd waxe, and steele thy constancie:
  So, carelesse flowers strow'd on the waters face,                 15
  The curled whirlepooles suck, smack, and embrace,
  Yet drowne them; so, the tapers beamie eye
  Amorously twinkling, beckens the giddie flie,
  Yet burnes his wings; and such the devill is,
  Scarce visiting them, who are intirely his.                       20
  When I behold a streame, which, from the spring,
  Doth with doubtfull melodious murmuring,
  Or in a speechlesse slumber, calmely ride
  Her wedded channels bosome, and then chide
  And bend her browes, and swell if any bough                       25
  Do but stoop downe, or kisse her upmost brow;
  Yet, if her often gnawing kisses winne
  The traiterous banke to gape, and let her in,
  She rusheth violently, and doth divorce
  Her from her native, and her long-kept course,                    30
  And rores, and braves it, and in gallant scorne,
  In flattering eddies promising retorne,
  She flouts the channell, who thenceforth is drie;
  Then say I; that is shee, and this am I.
  Yet let not thy deepe bitternesse beget                           35
  Carelesse despaire in mee, for that will whet
  My minde to scorne; and Oh, love dull'd with paine
  Was ne'r so wise, nor well arm'd as disdaine.
  Then with new eyes I shall survay thee,'and spie
  Death in thy cheekes, and darknesse in thine eye.                 40
  Though hope bred faith and love; thus taught, I shall
  As nations do from Rome, from thy love fall.
  My hate shall outgrow thine, and utterly
  I will renounce thy dalliance: and when I
  Am the Recusant, in that resolute state,                          45
  What hurts it mee to be'excommunicate?



ELEGIE VII.

  Natures lay Ideot, I taught thee to love,
  And in that sophistrie, Oh, thou dost prove
  Too subtile: Foole, thou didst not understand
  The mystique language of the eye nor hand:
  Nor couldst thou judge the difference of the aire                  5
  Of sighes, and say, this lies, this sounds despaire:
  Nor by the'eyes water call a maladie
  Desperately hot, or changing feaverously.
  I had not taught thee then, the Alphabet
  Of flowers, how they devisefully being set                        10
  And bound up, might with speechlesse secrecie
  Deliver arrands mutely, and mutually.
  Remember since all thy words us'd to bee
  To every suitor; _I_, _if my friends agree_;
  Since, household charmes, thy husbands name to teach,             15
  Were all the love trickes, that thy wit could reach;
  And since, an houres discourse could scarce have made
  One answer in thee, and that ill arraid
  In broken proverbs, and torne sentences.
  Thou art not by so many duties his,                               20
  That from the worlds Common having sever'd thee,
  Inlaid thee, neither to be seene, nor see,
  As mine: who have with amorous delicacies
  Refin'd thee'into a blis-full Paradise.
  Thy graces and good words my creatures bee;                       25
  I planted knowledge and lifes tree in thee,
  Which Oh, shall strangers taste? Must I alas
  Frame and enamell Plate, and drinke in Glasse?
  Chafe waxe for others seales? breake a colts force
  And leave him then, beeing made a ready horse?                    30



ELEGIE VIII.

_The Comparison._

  As the sweet sweat of Roses in a Still,
  As that which from chaf'd muskats pores doth trill,
  As the Almighty Balme of th'early East,
  Such are the sweat drops of my Mistris breast,
  And on her <brow> her skin such lustre sets,                       5
  They seeme no sweat drops, but pearle coronets.
  Ranke sweaty froth thy Mistresse's brow defiles,
  Like spermatique issue of ripe menstruous boiles,
  Or like the skumme, which, by needs lawlesse law
  Enforc'd, Sanserra's starved men did draw                         10
  From parboild shooes, and bootes, and all the rest
  Which were with any soveraigne fatnes blest,
  And like vile lying stones in saffrond tinne,
  Or warts, or wheales, they hang upon her skinne.
  Round as the world's her head, on every side,                     15
  Like to the fatall Ball which fell on Ide,
  Or that whereof God had such jealousie,
  As, for the ravishing thereof we die.
  Thy _head_ is like a rough-hewne statue of jeat,
  Where marks for eyes, nose, mouth, are yet scarce set;            20
  Like the first Chaos, or flat seeming face
  Of Cynthia, when th'earths shadowes her embrace.
  Like Proserpines white beauty-keeping chest,
  Or Joues best fortunes urne, is her faire brest.
  Thine's like worme eaten trunkes, cloth'd in seals skin,          25
  Or grave, that's dust without, and stinke within.
  And like that slender stalke, at whose end stands
  The wood-bine quivering, are her armes and hands.
  Like rough bark'd elmboughes, or the russet skin
  Of men late scurg'd for madnes, or for sinne,                     30
  Like Sun-parch'd quarters on the citie gate,
  Such is thy tann'd skins lamentable state.
  And like a bunch of ragged carrets stand
  The short swolne fingers of thy gouty hand.
  Then like the Chymicks masculine equall fire,                     35
  Which in the Lymbecks warme wombe doth inspire
  Into th'earths worthlesse durt a soule of gold,
  Such cherishing heat her best lov'd part doth hold.
  Thine's like the dread mouth of a fired gunne,
  Or like hot liquid metalls newly runne                            40
  Into clay moulds, or like to that Ætna
  Where round about the grasse is burnt away.
  Are not your kisses then as filthy, and more,
  As a worme sucking an invenom'd sore?
  Doth not thy fearefull hand in feeling quake,                     45
  As one which gath'ring flowers, still feares a snake?
  Is not your last act harsh, and violent,
  As when a Plough a stony ground doth rent?
  So kisse good Turtles, so devoutly nice
  Are Priests in handling reverent sacrifice,                       50
  And such in searching wounds the Surgeon is
  As wee, when wee embrace, or touch, or kisse.
  Leave her, and I will leave comparing thus,
  She, and comparisons are odious.



ELEGIE IX.

_The Autumnall_

  No _Spring_, nor _Summer_ Beauty hath such grace,
    As I have seen in one _Autumnall_ face.
  Yong _Beauties_ force our love, and that's a _Rape_,
    This doth but _counsaile_, yet you cannot scape.
  If t'were a _shame_ to love, here t'were no _shame_,               5
    _Affection_ here takes _Reverences_ name.
  Were her first yeares the _Golden Age_; That's true,
    But now shee's _gold_ oft tried, and ever new.
  That was her torrid and inflaming time,
    This is her tolerable _Tropique clyme_.                         10
  Faire eyes, who askes more heate then comes from hence,
    He in a fever wishes pestilence.
  Call not these wrinkles, _graves_; If _graves_ they were,
    They were _Loves graves_; for else he is no where.
  Yet lies not Love _dead_ here, but here doth sit                  15
    Vow'd to this trench, like an _Anachorit_.
  And here, till hers, which must be his _death_, come,
    He doth not digge a _Grave_, but build a _Tombe_.
  Here dwells he, though he sojourne ev'ry where,
    In _Progresse_, yet his standing house is here.                 20
  Here, where still _Evening_ is; not _noone_, nor _night_;
    Where no _voluptuousnesse_, yet all _delight_.
  In all her words, unto all hearers fit,
    You may at _Revels_, you at _Counsaile_, sit.
  This is loves timber, youth his under-wood;                       25
    There he, as wine in _Iune_, enrages blood,
  Which then comes seasonabliest, when our tast
    And appetite to other things, is past.
  _Xerxes_ strange _Lydian_ love, the _Platane_ tree,
    Was lov'd for age, none being so large as shee,                 30
  Or else because, being yong, nature did blesse
    Her youth with ages glory, _Barrennesse_.
  If we love things long sought, _Age_ is a thing
    Which we are fifty yeares in compassing.
  If transitory things, which soone decay,                          35
    _Age_ must be lovelyest at the latest day.
  But name not _Winter-faces_, whose skin's slacke;
    Lanke, as an unthrifts purse; but a soules sacke;
  Whose _Eyes_ seeke light within, for all here's shade;
    Whose _mouthes_ are holes, rather worne out, then made;         40
  Whose every tooth to a severall place is gone,
    To vexe their soules at _Resurrection_;
  Name not these living _Deaths-heads_ unto mee,
    For these, not _Ancient_, but _Antique_ be.
  I hate extreames; yet I had rather stay                           45
    With _Tombs_, then _Cradles_, to weare out a day.
  Since such loves naturall lation is, may still
    My love descend, and journey downe the hill,
  Not panting after growing beauties, so,
    I shall ebbe out with them, who home-ward goe.                  50




ELEGIE X.

_The Dreame._

  Image of her whom I love, more then she,
    Whose faire impression in my faithfull heart,
  Makes mee her _Medall_, and makes her love mee,
    As Kings do coynes, to which their stamps impart
  The value: goe, and take my heart from hence,                      5
    Which now is growne too great and good for me:
  _Honours_ oppresse weake spirits, and our sense
    Strong objects dull; the more, the lesse wee see.
  When you are gone, and _Reason_ gone with you,
    Then _Fantasie_ is Queene and Soule, and all;                   10
  She can present joyes meaner then you do;
    Convenient, and more proportionall.
  So, if I dreame I have you, I have you,
    For, all our joyes are but fantasticall.
  And so I scape the paine, for paine is true;                      15
    And sleepe which locks up sense, doth lock out all.
  After a such fruition I shall wake,
    And, but the waking, nothing shall repent;
  And shall to love more thankfull Sonnets make,
    Then if more _honour_, _teares_, and _paines_ were spent.       20
  But dearest heart, and dearer image stay;
    Alas, true joyes at best are _dreame_ enough;
  Though you stay here you passe too fast away:
    For even at first lifes _Taper_ is a snuffe.
  Fill'd with her love, may I be rather grown                       25
  Mad with much _heart_, then _ideott_ with none.






ELEGIE XI.

_The Bracelet._

_Vpon the losse of his Mistresses Chaine, for which he made
satisfaction._

  Not that in colour it was like thy haire,
  For Armelets of that thou maist let me weare:
  Nor that thy hand it oft embrac'd and kist,
  For so it had that good, which oft I mist:
  Nor for that silly old moralitie,                                  5
  That as these linkes were knit, our love should bee:
  Mourne I that I thy seavenfold chaine have lost;
  Nor for the luck sake; but the bitter cost.
  O, shall twelve righteous Angels, which as yet
  No leaven of vile soder did admit;                                10
  Nor yet by any way have straid or gone
  From the first state of their Creation;
  Angels, which heaven commanded to provide
  All things to me, and be my faithfull guide;
  To gaine new friends, t'appease great enemies;                    15
  To comfort my soule, when I lie or rise;
  Shall these twelve innocents, by thy severe
  Sentence (dread judge) my sins great burden beare?
  Shall they be damn'd, and in the furnace throwne,
  And punisht for offences not their owne?                          20
  They save not me, they doe not ease my paines,
  When in that hell they'are burnt and tyed in chains.
  Were they but Crownes of France, I cared not,
  For, most of these, their naturall Countreys rot
  I think possesseth, they come here to us,                         25
  So pale, so lame, so leane, so ruinous;
  And howsoe'r French Kings most Christian be,
  Their Crownes are circumcis'd most Iewishly.
  Or were they Spanish Stamps, still travelling,
  That are become as Catholique as their King,                      30
  Those unlickt beare-whelps, unfil'd pistolets
  That (more than Canon shot) availes or lets;
  Which negligently left unrounded, looke
  Like many angled figures, in the booke
  Of some great Conjurer that would enforce                         35
  Nature, as these doe justice, from her course;
  Which, as the soule quickens head, feet and heart,
  As streames, like veines, run through th'earth's every part,
  Visit all Countries, and have slily made
  Gorgeous _France_, ruin'd, ragged and decay'd;                    40
  _Scotland_, which knew no State, proud in one day:
  And mangled seventeen-headed _Belgia_.
  Or were it such gold as that wherewithall
  Almighty _Chymiques_ from each minerall,
  Having by subtle fire a soule out-pull'd;                         45
  Are dirtely and desperately gull'd:
  I would not spit to quench the fire they'are in,
  For, they are guilty of much hainous Sin.
  But, shall my harmlesse angels perish? Shall
  I lose my guard, my ease, my food, my all?                        50
  Much hope which they should nourish will be dead,
  Much of my able youth, and lustyhead
  Will vanish; if thou love let them alone,
  For thou wilt love me lesse when they are gone;
  And be content that some lowd squeaking Cryer                     55
  Well-pleas'd with one leane thred-bare groat, for hire,
  May like a devill roare through every street;
  And gall the finders conscience, if they meet.
  Or let mee creepe to some dread Conjurer,
  That with phantastique scheames fils full much paper;             60
  Which hath divided heaven in tenements,
  And with whores, theeves, and murderers stuft his rents,
  So full, that though hee passe them all in sinne,
  He leaves himselfe no roome to enter in.
  But if, when all his art and time is spent,                       65
  Hee say 'twill ne'r be found; yet be content;
  Receive from him that doome ungrudgingly,
  Because he is the mouth of destiny.
  Thou say'st (alas) the gold doth still remaine,
  Though it be chang'd, and put into a chaine;                      70
  So in the first falne angels, resteth still
  Wisdome and knowledge; but,'tis turn'd to ill:
  As these should doe good works; and should provide
  Necessities; but now must nurse thy pride.
  And they are still bad angels; Mine are none;                     75
  For, forme gives being, and their forme is gone:
  Pitty these Angels; yet their dignities
  Passe Vertues, Powers, and Principalities.
  But, thou art resolute; Thy will be done!
  Yet with such anguish, as her onely sonne                         80
  The Mother in the hungry grave doth lay,
  Vnto the fire these Martyrs I betray.
  Good soules, (for you give life to every thing)
  Good Angels, (for good messages you bring)
  Destin'd you might have beene to such an one,                     85
  As would have lov'd and worship'd you alone:
  One that would suffer hunger, nakednesse,
  Yea death, ere he would make your number lesse.
  But, I am guilty of your sad decay;
  May your few fellowes longer with me stay.                        90
  But ô thou wretched finder whom I hate
  So, that I almost pitty thy estate:
  Gold being the heaviest metal amongst all,
  May my most heavy curse upon thee fall:
  Here fetter'd, manacled, and hang'd in chains,                    95
  First mayst thou bee; then chaind to hellish paines;
  Or be with forraine gold brib'd to betray
  Thy Countrey, and faile both of that and thy pay.
  May the next thing thou stoop'st to reach, containe
  Poyson, whose nimble fume rot thy moist braine;                  100
  Or libels, or some interdicted thing,
  Which negligently kept, thy ruine bring.
  Lust-bred diseases rot thee; and dwell with thee
  Itching desire, and no abilitie.
  May all the evils that gold ever wrought;                        105
  All mischiefes that all devils ever thought;
  Want after plenty; poore and gouty age;
  The plagues of travellers; love; marriage
  Afflict thee, and at thy lives last moment,
  May thy swolne sinnes themselves to thee present.                110
  But, I forgive; repent thee honest man:
  Gold is Restorative, restore it then:
  But if from it thou beest loath to depart,
  Because 'tis cordiall, would twere at thy heart.



ELEGIE XII.

_His parting from her._

  Since she must go, and I must mourn, come Night,
  Environ me with darkness, whilst I write:
  Shadow that hell unto me, which alone
  I am to suffer when my Love is gone.
  Alas the darkest Magick cannot do it,                              5
  Thou and greate Hell to boot are shadows to it.
  Should _Cinthia_ quit thee, _Venus_, and each starre,
  It would not forme one thought dark as mine are.
  I could lend thee obscureness now, and say,
  Out of my self, There should be no more Day,                      10
  Such is already my felt want of sight,
  Did not the fires within me force a light.
  Oh Love, that fire and darkness should be mixt,
  Or to thy Triumphs soe strange torments fixt?
  Is't because thou thy self art blind, that wee                    15
  Thy Martyrs must no more each other see?
  Or tak'st thou pride to break us on the wheel,
  And view old Chaos in the Pains we feel?
  Or have we left undone some mutual Right,
  Through holy fear, that merits thy despight?                      20
  No, no. The falt was mine, impute it to me,
  Or rather to conspiring destinie,
  Which (since I lov'd for forme before) decreed,
  That I should suffer when I lov'd indeed:
  And therefore now, sooner then I can say,                         25
  I saw the golden fruit, 'tis rapt away.
  Or as I had watcht one drop in a vast stream,
  And I left wealthy only in a dream.
  Yet Love, thou'rt blinder then thy self in this,
  To vex my Dove-like friend for my amiss:                          30
  And, where my own sad truth may expiate
  Thy wrath, to make her fortune run my fate:
  So blinded Justice doth, when Favorites fall,
  Strike them, their house, their friends, their followers all.
  Was't not enough that thou didst dart thy fires                   35
  Into our blouds, inflaming our desires,
  And made'st us sigh and glow, and pant, and burn,
  And then thy self into our flame did'st turn?
  Was't not enough, that thou didst hazard us
  To paths in love so dark, so dangerous:                           40
  And those so ambush'd round with houshold spies,
  And over all, thy husbands towring eyes
  That flam'd with oylie sweat of jealousie:
  Yet went we not still on with Constancie?
  Have we not kept our guards, like spie on spie?                   45
  Had correspondence whilst the foe stood by?
  Stoln (more to sweeten them) our many blisses
  Of meetings, conference, embracements, kisses?
  Shadow'd with negligence our most respects?
  Varied our language through all dialects,                         50
  Of becks, winks, looks, and often under-boards
  Spoak dialogues with our feet far from our words?
  Have we prov'd all these secrets of our Art,
  Yea, thy pale inwards, and thy panting heart?
  And, after all this passed Purgatory,                             55
  Must sad divorce make us the vulgar story?
  First let our eyes be rivited quite through
  Our turning brains, and both our lips grow to:
  Let our armes clasp like Ivy, and our fear
  Freese us together, that we may stick here,                       60
  Till Fortune, that would rive us, with the deed
  Strain her eyes open, and it make them bleed:
  For Love it cannot be, whom hitherto
  I have accus'd, should such a mischief doe.
  Oh Fortune, thou'rt not worth my least exclame,                   65
  And plague enough thou hast in thy own shame.
  Do thy great worst, my friend and I have armes,
  Though not against thy strokes, against thy harmes.
  Rend us in sunder, thou canst not divide
  Our bodies so, but that our souls are ty'd,                       70
  And we can love by letters still and gifts,
  And thoughts and dreams; Love never wanteth shifts.
  I will not look upon the quickning Sun,
  But straight her beauty to my sense shall run;
  The ayre shall note her soft, the fire most pure;                 75
  Water suggest her clear, and the earth sure.
  Time shall not lose our passages; the Spring
  How fresh our love was in the beginning;
  The Summer how it ripened in the eare;
  And Autumn, what our golden harvests were.                        80
  The Winter I'll not think on to spite thee,
  But count it a lost season, so shall shee.
  And dearest Friend, since we must part, drown night
  With hope of Day, burthens well born are light.
  Though cold and darkness longer hang somewhere,                   85
  Yet _Phoebus_ equally lights all the Sphere.
  And what he cannot in like Portions pay,
  The world enjoyes in Mass, and so we may.
  Be then ever your self, and let no woe
  Win on your health, your youth, your beauty: so                   90
  Declare your self base fortunes Enemy,
  No less by your contempt then constancy:
  That I may grow enamoured on your mind,
  When my own thoughts I there reflected find.
  For this to th'comfort of my Dear I vow,                          95
  My Deeds shall still be what my words are now;
  The Poles shall move to teach me ere I start;
  And when I change my Love, I'll change my heart;
  Nay, if I wax but cold in my desire,
  Think, heaven hath motion lost, and the world, fire:             100
  Much more I could, but many words have made
  That, oft, suspected which men would perswade;
  Take therefore all in this: I love so true,
  As I will never look for less in you.



ELEGIE XIII.

_Iulia._

  Harke newes, ô envy, thou shalt heare descry'd
  My _Iulia_; who as yet was ne'r envy'd.
  To vomit gall in slander, swell her vaines
  With calumny, that hell it selfe disdaines,
  Is her continuall practice; does her best,                         5
  To teare opinion even out of the brest
  Of dearest friends, and (which is worse than vilde)
  Sticks jealousie in wedlock; her owne childe
  Scapes not the showres of envie, To repeate
  The monstrous fashions, how, were, alive, to eate                 10
  Deare reputation. Would to God she were
  But halfe so loath to act vice, as to heare
  My milde reproofe. Liv'd _Mantuan_ now againe,
  That fœmall Mastix, to limme with his penne
  This she _Chymera_, that hath eyes of fire,                       15
  Burning with anger, anger feeds desire,
  Tongued like the night-crow, whose ill boding cries
  Give out for nothing but new injuries,
  Her breath like to the juice in _Tenarus_
  That blasts the springs, though ne'r so prosperous,               20
  Her hands, I know not how, us'd more to spill
  The food of others, then her selfe to fill.
  But oh her minde, that _Orcus_, which includes
  Legions of mischiefs, countlesse multitudes
  Of formlesse curses, projects unmade up,                          25
  Abuses yet unfashion'd, thoughts corrupt,
  Mishapen Cavils, palpable untroths,
  Inevitable errours, self-accusing oaths:
  These, like those Atoms swarming in the Sunne,
  Throng in her bosome for creation.                                30
  I blush to give her halfe her due; yet say,
  No poyson's halfe so bad as _Iulia_.


ELEGIE XIV.

_A Tale of a Citizen and his Wife._

  I sing no harme good sooth to any wight,
  To Lord or foole, Cuckold, begger or knight,
  To peace-teaching Lawyer, Proctor, or brave
  Reformed or reduced Captaine, Knave,
  Officer, Iugler, or Iustice of peace,                              5
  Iuror or Iudge; I touch no fat sowes grease,
  I am no Libeller, nor will be any,
  But (like a true man) say there are too many.
  I feare not _ore tenus_; for my tale,
  Nor Count nor Counsellour will redd or pale.                      10
  A Citizen and his wife the other day
  Both riding on one horse, upon the way
  I overtooke, the wench a pretty peate,
  And (by her eye) well fitting for the feate.
  I saw the lecherous Citizen turne backe                           15
  His head, and on his wifes lip steale a smacke,
  Whence apprehending that the man was kinde,
  Riding before, to kisse his wife behinde,
  To get acquaintance with him I began
  To sort discourse fit for so fine a man:                          20
  I ask'd the number of the Plaguy Bill,
  Ask'd if the Custome Farmers held out still,
  Of the Virginian plot, and whether Ward
  The traffique of the I<n>land seas had marr'd,
  Whether the Brittaine _Burse_ did fill apace,                     25
  And likely were to give th'Exchange disgrace;
  Of new-built _Algate_, and the _More-field_ crosses,
  Of store of Bankerouts, and poore Merchants losses
  I urged him to speake; But he (as mute
  As an old Courtier worne to his last suite)                       30
  Replies with onely yeas and nayes; At last
  (To fit his element) my theame I cast
  On Tradesmens gaines; that set his tongue agoing:
  Alas, good sir (quoth he) _There is no doing
  In Court nor City now_; she smil'd and I,                         35
  And (in my conscience) both gave him the lie
  In one met thought: but he went on apace,
  And at the present time with such a face
  He rail'd, as fray'd me; for he gave no praise,
  To any but my Lord of _Essex_ dayes;                              40
  Call'd those the age of action; true (quoth Hee)
  There's now as great an itch of bravery,
  And heat of taking up, but cold lay downe,
  For, put to push of pay, away they runne;
  Our onely City trades of hope now are                             45
  Bawd, Tavern-keeper, Whore and Scrivener;
  The much of Privileg'd kingsmen, and the store
  Of fresh protections make the rest all poore;
  In the first state of their Creation,
  Though many stoutly stand, yet proves not one                     50
  A righteous pay-master. Thus ranne he on
  In a continued rage: so void of reason
  Seem'd his harsh talke, I sweat for feare of treason.
  And (troth) how could I lesse? when in the prayer
  For the protection of the wise Lord Major,                        55
  And his wise brethrens worships, when one prayeth,
  He swore that none could say Amen with faith.
  To get him off from what I glowed to heare,
  (In happy time) an Angel did appeare,
  The bright Signe of a lov'd and wel-try'd Inne,                   60
  Where many Citizens with their wives have bin
  Well us'd and often; here I pray'd him stay,
  To take some due refreshment by the way.
  Looke how hee look'd that hid the gold (his hope)
  And at's returne found nothing but a Rope,                        65
  So he on me, refus'd and made away,
  Though willing she pleaded a weary day:
  I found my misse, struck hands, and praid him tell
  (To hold acquaintance still) where he did dwell;
  He barely nam'd the street, promis'd the Wine,                    70
  But his kinde wife gave me the very Signe.




ELEGIE XV.

_The Expostulation._

  To make the doubt cleare, that no woman's true,
    Was it my fate to prove it strong in you?
  Thought I, but one had breathed purest aire,
    And must she needs be false because she's faire?
  Is it your beauties marke, or of your youth,                       5
    Or your perfection, not to study truth?
  Or thinke you heaven is deafe, or hath no eyes?
    Or those it hath, smile at your perjuries?
  Are vowes so cheape with women, or the matter
    Whereof they are made, that they are writ in water,             10
  And blowne away with winde? Or doth their breath
    (Both hot and cold at once) make life and death?
  Who could have thought so many accents sweet
    Form'd into words, so many sighs should meete
  As from our hearts, so many oathes, and teares                    15
    Sprinkled among, (all sweeter by our feares
  And the divine impression of stolne kisses,
    That seal'd the rest) should now prove empty blisses?
  Did you draw bonds to forfet? signe to breake?
    Or must we reade you quite from what you speake,                20
  And finde the truth out the wrong way? or must
    Hee first desire you false, would wish you just?
  O I prophane, though most of women be
    This kinde of beast, my thought shall except thee;
  My dearest love, though froward jealousie,                        25
    With circumstance might urge thy'inconstancie,
  Sooner I'll thinke the Sunne will cease to cheare
    The teeming earth, and _that_ forget to beare,
  Sooner that rivers will runne back, or Thames
    With ribs of Ice in June would bind his streames,               30
  Or Nature, by whose strength the world endures,
    Would change her course, before you alter yours.
  But O that treacherous breast to whom weake you
    Did trust our Counsells, and wee both may rue,
  Having his falshood found too late, 'twas hee                     35
    That made me _cast_ you guilty, and you me,
  Whilst he, black wretch, betray'd each simple word
    Wee spake, unto the cunning of a third.
  Curst may hee be, that so our love hath slaine,
    And wander on the earth, wretched as _Cain_,                    40
  Wretched as hee, and not deserve least pitty;
    In plaguing him, let misery be witty;
  Let all eyes shunne him, and hee shunne each eye,
    Till hee be noysome as his infamie;
  May he without remorse deny God thrice,                           45
    And not be trusted more on his Soules price;
  And after all selfe torment, when hee dyes,
    May Wolves teare out his heart, Vultures his eyes,
  Swine eate his bowels, and his falser tongue
    That utter'd all, be to some Raven flung,                       50
  And let his carrion coarse be a longer feast
    To the Kings dogges, then any other beast.
  Now have I curst, let us our love revive;
    In mee the flame was never more alive;
  I could beginne againe to court and praise,                       55
    And in that pleasure lengthen the short dayes
  Of my lifes lease; like Painters that do take
    Delight, not in made worke, but whiles they make;
  I could renew those times, when first I saw
    Love in your eyes, that gave my tongue the law                  60
  To like what you lik'd; and at maskes and playes
    Commend the selfe same Actors, the same wayes;
  Aske how you did, and often with intent
    Of being officious, be impertinent;
  All which were such soft pastimes, as in these                    65
    Love was as subtilly catch'd, as a disease;
  But being got it is a treasure sweet,
    Which to defend is harder then to get:
  And ought not be prophan'd on either part,
    For though'tis got by _chance_, 'tis kept by _art_.             70



ELEGIE XVI.

_On his Mistris._

  By our first strange and fatall interview,
  By all desires which thereof did ensue,
  By our long starving hopes, by that remorse
  Which my words masculine perswasive force
  Begot in thee, and by the memory                                   5
  Of hurts, which spies and rivals threatned me,
  I calmly beg: But by thy fathers wrath,
  By all paines, which want and divorcement hath,
  I conjure thee, and all the oathes which I
  And thou have sworne to seale joynt constancy,                    10
  Here I unsweare, and overswear them thus,
  Thou shalt not love by wayes so dangerous.
  Temper, ô faire Love, loves impetuous rage,
  Be my true Mistris still, not my faign'd Page;
  I'll goe, and, by thy kinde leave, leave behinde                  15
  Thee, onely worthy to nurse in my minde,
  Thirst to come backe; ô if thou die before,
  My soule from other lands to thee shall soare.
  Thy (else Almighty) beautie cannot move
  Rage from the Seas, nor thy love teach them love,                 20
  Nor tame wilde Boreas harshnesse; Thou hast reade
  How roughly hee in peeces shivered
  Faire Orithea, whom he swore he lov'd.
  Fall ill or good, 'tis madnesse to have prov'd
  Dangers unurg'd; Feed on this flattery,                           25
  That absent Lovers one in th'other be.
  Dissemble nothing, not a boy, nor change
  Thy bodies habite, nor mindes; bee not strange
  To thy selfe onely; All will spie in thy face
  A blushing womanly discovering grace;                             30
  Richly cloath'd Apes, are call'd Apes, and as soone
  Ecclips'd as bright we call the Moone the Moone.
  Men of France, changeable Camelions,
  Spittles of diseases, shops of fashions,
  Loves fuellers, and the rightest company                          35
  Of Players, which upon the worlds stage be,
  Will quickly know thee, and no lesse, alas!
  Th'indifferent Italian, as we passe
  His warme land, well content to thinke thee Page,
  Will hunt thee with such lust, and hideous rage,                  40
  As _Lots_ faire guests were vext. But none of these
  Nor spungy hydroptique Dutch shall thee displease,
  If thou stay here. O stay here, for, for thee
  England is onely a worthy Gallerie,
  To walke in expectation, till from thence                         45
  Our greatest King call thee to his presence.
  When I am gone, dreame me some happinesse,
  Nor let thy lookes our long hid love confesse,
  Nor praise, nor dispraise me, nor blesse nor curse
  Openly loves force, nor in bed fright thy Nurse                   50
  With midnights startings, crying out, oh, oh
  Nurse, ô my love is slaine, I saw him goe
  O'r the white Alpes alone; I saw him I,
  Assail'd, fight, taken, stabb'd, bleed, fall, and die.
  Augure me better chance, except dread _Iove_                      55
  Thinke it enough for me to'have had thy love.



ELEGIE XVII.

_Variety._

  The heavens rejoyce in motion, why should I
  Abjure my so much lov'd variety,
  And not with many youth and love divide?
  Pleasure is none, if not diversifi'd:
  The sun that sitting in the chaire of light                        5
  Sheds flame into what else so ever doth seem bright,
  Is not contented at one Signe to Inne,
  But ends his year and with a new beginnes.
  All things doe willingly in change delight,
  The fruitfull mother of our appetite:                             10
  Rivers the clearer and more pleasing are,
  Where their fair spreading streames run wide and farr;
  And a dead lake that no strange bark doth greet,
  Corrupts it self and what doth live in it.
  Let no man tell me such a one is faire,                           15
  And worthy all alone my love to share.
  Nature in her hath done the liberall part
  Of a kinde Mistresse, and imploy'd her art
  To make her loveable, and I aver
  Him not humane that would turn back from her:                     20
  I love her well, and would, if need were, dye
  To doe her service. But followes it that I
  Must serve her onely, when I may have choice
  Of other beauties, and in change rejoice?
  The law is hard, and shall not have my voice.                     25
  The last I saw in all extreames is faire,
  And holds me in the Sun-beames of her haire;
  Her nymph-like features such agreements have
  That I could venture with her to the grave:
  Another's brown, I like her not the worse,                        30
  Her tongue is soft and takes me with discourse.
  Others, for that they well descended are,
  Do in my love obtain as large a share;
  And though they be not fair, 'tis much with mee
  To win their love onely for their degree.                         35
  And though I faile of my required ends,
  The attempt is glorious and it self commends.
  How happy were our Syres in ancient times,
  Who held plurality of loves no crime!
  With them it was accounted charity                                40
  To stirre up race of all indifferently;
  Kindreds were not exempted from the bands:
  Which with the Persian still in usage stands.
  Women were then no sooner asked then won,
  And what they did was honest and well done.                       45
  But since this title honour hath been us'd,
  Our weake credulity hath been abus'd;
  The golden laws of nature are repeald,
  Which our first Fathers in such reverence held;
  Our liberty's revers'd, our Charter's gone,                       50
  And we're made servants to opinion,
  A monster in no certain shape attir'd,
  And whose originall is much desir'd,
  Formlesse at first, but goeing on it fashions,
  And doth prescribe manners and laws to nations.                   55
  Here love receiv'd immedicable harmes,
  And was dispoiled of his daring armes.
  A greater want then is his daring eyes,
  He lost those awfull wings with which he flies;
  His sinewy bow, and those immortall darts                         60
  Wherewith he'is wont to bruise resisting hearts.
  Onely some few strong in themselves and free
  Retain the seeds of antient liberty,
  Following that part of Love although deprest,
  And make a throne for him within their brest,                     65
  In spight of modern censures him avowing
  Their Soveraigne, all service him allowing.
  Amongst which troop although I am the least,
  Yet equall in perfection with the best,
  I glory in subjection of his hand,                                70
  Nor ever did decline his least command:
  For in whatever forme the message came
  My heart did open and receive the same.
  But time will in his course a point discry
  When I this loved service must deny,                              75
  For our allegiance temporary is,
  With firmer age returnes our liberties.
  What time in years and judgement we repos'd,
  Shall not so easily be to change dispos'd,
  Nor to the art of severall eyes obeying;                          80
  But beauty with true worth securely weighing,
  Which being found assembled in some one,
  Wee'l love her ever, and love her alone.



ELEGIE XVIII.

_Loves Progress._

  Who ever loves, if he do not propose
  The right true end of love, he's one that goes
  To sea for nothing but to make him sick:
  Love is a bear-whelp born, if we o're lick
  Our love, and force it new strange shapes to take,                 5
  We erre, and of a lump a monster make.
  Were not a Calf a monster that were grown
  Face'd like a man, though better then his own?
  Perfection is in unitie: preferr
  One woman first, and then one thing in her.                       10
  I, when I value gold, may think upon
  The ductilness, the application,
  The wholsomness, the ingenuitie,
  From rust, from soil, from fire ever free:
  But if I love it, 'tis because 'tis made                          15
  By our new nature (Use) the soul of trade.
    All these in women we might think upon
  (If women had them) and yet love but one.
  Can men more injure women then to say
  They love them for that, by which they're not they?               20
  Makes virtue woman? must I cool my bloud
  Till I both be, and find one wise and good?
  May barren Angels love so. But if we
  Make love to woman; virtue is not she:
  As beauty'is not nor wealth: He that strayes thus                 25
  From her to hers, is more adulterous,
  Then if he took her maid. Search every spheare
  And firmament, our _Cupid_ is not there:
  He's an infernal god and under ground,
  With _Pluto_ dwells, where gold and fire abound:                  30
  Men to such Gods, their sacrificing Coles
  Did not in Altars lay, but pits and holes.
  Although we see Celestial bodies move
  Above the earth, the earth we Till and love:
  So we her ayres contemplate, words and heart,                     35
  And virtues; but we love the Centrique part.
    Nor is the soul more worthy, or more fit
  For love, then this, as infinite as it.
  But in attaining this desired place
  How much they erre; that set out at the face?                     40
  The hair a Forest is of Ambushes,
  Of springes, snares, fetters and manacles:
  The brow becalms us when 'tis smooth and plain,
  And when 'tis wrinckled, shipwracks us again.
  Smooth, 'tis a Paradice, where we would have                      45
  Immortal stay, and wrinkled 'tis our grave.
  The Nose (like to the first Meridian) runs
  Not 'twixt an East and West, but 'twixt two suns;
  It leaves a Cheek, a rosie Hemisphere
  On either side, and then directs us where                         50
  Upon the Islands fortunate we fall,
  (Not faynte _Canaries_, but _Ambrosiall_)
  Her swelling lips; To which when wee are come,
  We anchor there, and think our selves at home,
  For they seem all: there Syrens songs, and there                  55
  Wise Delphick Oracles do fill the ear;
  There in a Creek where chosen pearls do swell,
  The Remora, her cleaving tongue doth dwell.
  These, and the glorious Promontory, her Chin
  Ore past; and the streight _Hellespont_ betweene                  60
  The _Sestos_ and _Abydos_ of her breasts,
  (Not of two Lovers, but two Loves the neasts)
  Succeeds a boundless sea, but yet thine eye
  Some Island moles may scattered there descry;
  And Sailing towards her _India_, in that way                      65
  Shall at her fair Atlantick Navell stay;
  Though thence the Current be thy Pilot made,
  Yet ere thou be where thou wouldst be embay'd,
  Thou shalt upon another Forest set,
  Where many Shipwrack, and no further get.                         70
  When thou art there, consider what this chace
  Mispent by thy beginning at the face.
    Rather set out below; practice my Art,
  Some Symetry the foot hath with that part
  Which thou dost seek, and is thy Map for that                     75
  Lovely enough to stop, but not stay at:
  Least subject to disguise and change it is;
  Men say the Devil never can change his.
  It is the Emblem that hath figured
  Firmness; 'tis the first part that comes to bed.                  80
  Civilitie we see refin'd: the kiss
  Which at the face began, transplanted is,
  Since to the hand, since to the Imperial knee,
  Now at the Papal foot delights to be:
  If Kings think that the nearer way, and do                        85
  Rise from the foot, Lovers may do so too;
  For as free Spheres move faster far then can
  Birds, whom the air resists, so may that man
  Which goes this empty and Ætherial way,
  Then if at beauties elements he stay.                             90
  Rich Nature hath in women wisely made
  Two purses, and their mouths aversely laid:
  They then, which to the lower tribute owe,
  That way which that Exchequer looks, must go:
  He which doth not, his error is as great,                         95
  As who by Clyster gave the Stomack meat.




ELEGIE XIX.

_Going to Bed._

  Come, Madam, come, all rest my powers defie,
  Until I labour, I in labour lie.
  The foe oft-times having the foe in sight,
  Is tir'd with standing though he never fight.
  Off with that girdle, like heavens Zone glittering,                5
  But a far fairer world incompassing.
  Unpin that spangled breastplate which you wear,
  That th'eyes of busie fooles may be stopt there.
  Unlace your self, for that harmonious chyme,
  Tells me from you, that now it is bed time.                       10
  Off with that happy busk, which I envie,
  That still can be, and still can stand so nigh.
  Your gown going off, such beautious state reveals,
  As when from flowry meads th'hills shadow steales.
  Off with that wyerie Coronet and shew                             15
  The haiery Diademe which on you doth grow:
  Now off with those shooes, and then safely tread
  In this loves hallow'd temple, this soft bed.
  In such white robes, heaven's Angels us'd to be
  Receavd by men; Thou Angel bringst with thee                      20
  A heaven like Mahomets Paradise; and though
  Ill spirits walk in white, we easly know,
  By this these Angels from an evil sprite,
  Those set our hairs, but these our flesh uprigh
    Licence my roaving hands, and let them go,                      25
  Before, behind, between, above, below.
  O my America! my new-found-land,
  My kingdome, safliest when with one man man'd,
  My Myne of precious stones, My Emperie,
  How blest am I in this discovering thee!                          30
  To enter in these bonds, is to be free;
  Then where my hand is set, my seal shall be.
    Full nakedness! All joyes are due to thee,
  As souls unbodied, bodies uncloth'd must be,
  To taste whole joyes. Gems which you women use                    35
  Are like Atlanta's balls, cast in mens views,
  That when a fools eye lighteth on a Gem,
  His earthly soul may covet theirs, not them.
  Like pictures, or like books gay coverings made
  For lay-men, are all women thus array'd;                          40
  Themselves are mystick books, which only wee
  (Whom their imputed grace will dignifie)
  Must see reveal'd. Then since that I may know;
  As liberally, as to a Midwife, shew
  Thy self: cast all, yea, this white lynnen hence,                 45
  There is no pennance due to innocence.
    To teach thee, I am naked first; why than
  What needst thou have more covering then a man.




ELEGIE XX.

_Loves Warre._

  Till I have peace with thee, warr other men,
  And when I have peace, can I leave thee then?
  All other Warrs are scrupulous; Only thou
  O fayr free Citty, maist thyselfe allowe
  To any one: In Flanders, who can tell                              5
  Whether the Master presse; or men rebell?
  Only we know, that which all Ideots say,
  They beare most blows which come to part the fray.
  France in her lunatique giddines did hate
  Ever our men, yea and our God of late;                            10
  Yet she relyes upon our Angels well,
  Which nere returne; no more then they which fell.
  Sick Ireland is with a strange warr possest
  Like to an Ague; now raging, now at rest;
  Which time will cure: yet it must doe her good                    15
  If she were purg'd, and her head vayne let blood.
  And Midas joyes our Spanish journeys give,
  We touch all gold, but find no food to live.
  And I should be in the hott parching clyme,
  To dust and ashes turn'd before my time.                          20
  To mew me in a Ship, is to inthrall
  Mee in a prison, that weare like to fall;
  Or in a Cloyster; save that there men dwell
  In a calme heaven, here in a swaggering hell.
  Long voyages are long consumptions,                               25
  And ships are carts for executions.
  Yea they are Deaths; Is't not all one to flye
  Into an other World, as t'is to dye?
  Here let mee warr; in these armes lett mee lye;
  Here lett mee parlee, batter, bleede, and dye.                    30
  Thyne armes imprison me, and myne armes thee;
  Thy hart thy ransome is; take myne for mee.
  Other men war that they their rest may gayne;
  But wee will rest that wee may fight agayne.
  Those warrs the ignorant, these th'experienc'd love,              35
  There wee are alwayes under, here above.
  There Engins farr off breed a just true feare,
  Neere thrusts, pikes, stabs, yea bullets hurt not here.
  There lyes are wrongs; here safe uprightly lye;
  There men kill men, we'will make one by and by.                   40
  Thou nothing; I not halfe so much shall do
  In these Warrs, as they may which from us two
  Shall spring. Thousands wee see which travaile not
  To warrs; But stay swords, armes, and shott
  To make at home; And shall not I do then                          45
  More glorious service, staying to make men?



HEROICALL EPISTLE.


_Sapho_ to _Philænis_.

  Where is that holy fire, which _Verse_ is said
    To have? is that inchanting force decai'd?
  _Verse_ that drawes _Natures_ workes, from _Natures_ law,
    Thee, her best worke, to her worke cannot draw.
  Have my teares quench'd my old _Poetique_ fire;                    5
    Why quench'd they not as well, that of _desire_?
  Thoughts, my mindes creatures, often are with thee,
    But I, their maker, want their libertie.
  Onely thine image, in my heart, doth sit,
    But that is waxe, and fires environ it.                         10
  My fires have driven, thine have drawne it hence;
    And I am rob'd of _Picture_, _Heart_, and _Sense_.
  Dwells with me still mine irksome _Memory_,
    Which, both to keepe, and lose, grieves equally.
  That tells me'how faire thou art: Thou art so faire,              15
    As, _gods_, when _gods_ to thee I doe compare,
  Are grac'd thereby; And to make blinde men see,
    What things _gods_ are, I say they'are like to thee.
  For, if we justly call each silly _man_
    A _litle world_, What shall we call thee than?                  20
  Thou art not soft, and cleare, and strait, and faire,
    As _Down_, as _Stars_, _Cedars_, and _Lillies_ are,
  But thy right hand, and cheek, and eye, only
    Are like thy other hand, and cheek, and eye.
  Such was my _Phao_ awhile, but shall be never,                    25
    As thou, wast, art, and, oh, maist be ever.
  Here lovers sweare in their _Idolatrie_,
    That I am such; but _Griefe_ discolors me.
  And yet I grieve the lesse, least _Griefe_ remove
    My beauty, and make me'unworthy of thy love.                    30
  Plaies some soft boy with thee, oh there wants yet
    A mutuall feeling which should sweeten it.
  His chinne, a thorny hairy unevennesse
    Doth threaten, and some daily change possesse.
  Thy body is a naturall _Paradise_,                                35
    In whose selfe, unmanur'd, all pleasure lies,
  Nor needs _perfection_; why shouldst thou than
    Admit the tillage of a harsh rough man?
  Men leave behinde them that which their sin showes,
    And are as theeves trac'd, which rob when it snows.             40
  But of our dallyance no more signes there are,
    Then _fishes_ leave in streames, or _Birds_ in aire.
  And betweene us all sweetnesse may be had;
    All, all that _Nature_ yields, or _Art_ can adde.
  My two lips, eyes, thighs, differ from thy two,                   45
    But so, as thine from one another doe;
  And, oh, no more; the likenesse being such,
    Why should they not alike in all parts touch?
  Hand to strange hand, lippe to lippe none denies;
    Why should they brest to brest, or thighs to thighs?            50
  Likenesse begets such strange selfe flatterie,
    That touching my selfe, all seemes done to thee.
  My selfe I embrace, and mine owne hands I kisse,
    And amorously thanke my selfe for this.
  Me, in my glasse, I call thee; But alas,                          55
    When I would kisse, teares dimme mine _eyes_, and _glasse_.
  O cure this loving madnesse, and restore
    Me to mee; thee, my _halfe_, my _all_, my _more_.
  So may thy cheekes red outweare scarlet dye,
    And their white, whitenesse of the _Galaxy_,                    60
  So may thy mighty, amazing beauty move
    _Envy_'in all _women_, and in all _men_, _love_,
  And so be _change_, and _sicknesse_, farre from thee,
    As thou by comming neere, keep'st them from me.



EPITHALAMIONS,

_OR_

MARRIAGE SONGS.


_An Epithalamion, Or mariage Song on the Lady_ Elizabeth, _and_ Count
Palatine _being married on St._ Valentines _day._


I.

  Haile Bishop Valentine, whose day this is,
      All the Aire is thy Diocis,
      And all the chirping Choristers
  And other birds are thy Parishioners,
        Thou marryest every yeare                                    5
  The Lirique Larke, and the grave whispering Dove,
  The Sparrow that neglects his life for love,
  The household Bird, with the red stomacher,
      Thou mak'st the black bird speed as soone,
  As doth the Goldfinch, or the Halcyon;                            10
  The husband cocke lookes out, and straight is sped,
  And meets his wife, which brings her feather-bed.
  This day more cheerfully then ever shine,
  This day, which might enflame thy self, Old Valentine.


II.

  Till now, Thou warmd'st with multiplying loves                    15
        Two larkes, two sparrowes, or two Doves,
          All that is nothing unto this,
  For thou this day couplest two Phœnixes;
          Thou mak'st a Taper see
  What the sunne never saw, and what the Arke                       20
  (Which was of soules, and beasts, the cage, and park,)
  Did not containe, one bed containes, through Thee,
          Two Phœnixes, whose joyned breasts
  Are unto one another mutuall nests,
  Where motion kindles such fires, as shall give                    25
  Yong Phœnixes, and yet the old shall live.
  Whose love and courage never shall decline,
  But make the whole year through, thy day, O Valentine.


III.

  Up then faire Phœnix Bride, frustrate the Sunne,
        Thy selfe from thine affection                              30
        Takest warmth enough, and from thine eye
  All lesser birds will take their Jollitie.
          Up, up, faire Bride, and call,
  Thy starres, from out their severall boxes, take
  Thy Rubies, Pearles, and Diamonds forth, and make                 35
  Thy selfe a constellation, of them All,
          And by their blazing, signifie,
  That a Great Princess falls, but doth not die;
  Bee thou a new starre, that to us portends
  Ends of much wonder; And be Thou those ends.                      40
  Since thou dost this day in new glory shine,
  May all men date Records, from this thy Valentine.


IIII.

  Come forth, come forth, and as one glorious flame
        Meeting Another, growes the same,
        So meet thy Fredericke, and so                              45
  To an unseparable union growe.
          Since separation
  Falls not on such things as are infinite,
  Nor things which are but one, can disunite,
  You'are twice inseparable, great, and one;                        50
          Goe then to where the Bishop staies,
  To make you one, his way, which divers waies
  Must be effected; and when all is past,
  And that you'are one, by hearts and hands made fast,
  You two have one way left, your selves to'entwine,                55
  Besides this Bishops knot, or Bishop Valentine.


V.

  But oh, what ailes the Sunne, that here he staies,
          Longer to day, then other daies?
          Staies he new light from these to get?
  And finding here such store, is loth to set?                      60
            And why doe you two walke,
  So slowly pac'd in this procession?
  Is all your care but to be look'd upon,
  And be to others spectacle, and talke?
          The feast, with gluttonous delaies,                       65
  Is eaten, and too long their meat they praise,
  The masquers come too late, and'I thinke, will stay,
  Like Fairies, till the Cock crow them away.
  Alas, did not Antiquity assigne
  A night, as well as day, to thee, O Valentine?                    70


VI.

  They did, and night is come; and yet wee see
          Formalities retarding thee.
          What meane these Ladies, which (as though
  They were to take a clock in peeces,) goe
          So nicely about the Bride;                                75
  A Bride, before a good night could be said,
  Should vanish from her cloathes, into her bed,
  As Soules from bodies steale, and are not spy'd.
          But now she is laid; What though shee bee?
  Yet there are more delayes, For, where is he?                     80
  He comes, and passes through Spheare after Spheare,
  First her sheetes, then her Armes, then any where.
  Let not this day, then, but this night be thine,
  Thy day was but the eve to this, O Valentine.


VII.

  Here lyes a shee Sunne, and a hee Moone here,                     85
          She gives the best light to his Spheare,
          Or each is both, and all, and so
  They unto one another nothing owe,
          And yet they doe, but are
  So just and rich in that coyne which they pay,                    90
  That neither would, nor needs forbeare, nor stay;
  Neither desires to be spar'd, nor to spare,
          They quickly pay their debt, and then
  Take no acquittances, but pay again;
  They pay, they give, they lend, and so let fall                   95
  No such occasion to be liberall.
  More truth, more courage in these two do shine,
  Then all thy turtles have, and sparrows, Valentine.


VIII.

  And by this act of these two Phenixes
          Nature againe restored is,                               100
          For since these two are two no more,
  Ther's but one Phenix still, as was before.
          Rest now at last, and wee
  As Satyres watch the Sunnes uprise, will stay
  Waiting, when your eyes opened, let out day,                     105
  Onely desir'd, because your face wee see;
          Others neare you shall whispering speake,
  And wagers lay, at which side day will breake,
  And win by'observing, then, whose hand it is
  That opens first a curtaine, hers or his;                        110
  This will be tryed to morrow after nine,
  Till which houre, wee thy day enlarge, O Valentine.




ECCLOGUE.


1613. _December_ 26.

    Allophanes _finding_ Idios _in the country in Christmas
      time, reprehends his absence from court, at the mariage
      Of the Earle of Sommerset_, Idios _gives an account of
      his purpose therein, and of his absence thence_.


_Allophanes._

  Vnseasonable man, statue of ice,
    What could to countries solitude entice
  Thee, in this yeares cold and decrepit time?
    Natures instinct drawes to the warmer clime
  Even small birds, who by that courage dare,                        5
    In numerous fleets, saile through their Sea, the aire.
  What delicacie can in fields appeare,
    Whil'st Flora'herselfe doth a freeze jerkin weare?
  Whil'st windes do all the trees and hedges strip
    Of leafes, to furnish roddes enough to whip                     10
  Thy madnesse from thee; and all springs by frost
    Have taken cold, and their sweet murmure lost;
  If thou thy faults or fortunes would'st lament
    With just solemnity, do it in Lent;
  At Court the spring already advanced is,                          15
    The Sunne stayes longer up; and yet not his
  The glory is, farre other, other fires.
    First, zeale to Prince and State; then loves desires
  Burne in one brest, and like heavens two great lights,
    The first doth governe dayes, the other nights.                 20
  And then that early light, which did appeare
    Before the Sunne and Moone created were,
  The Princes favour is defus'd o'r all,
    From which all Fortunes, Names, and Natures fall;
  Then from those wombes of starres, the Brides bright eyes,        25
    At every glance, a constellation flyes,
  And sowes the Court with starres, and doth prevent
    In light and power, the all-ey'd firmament;
  First her eyes kindle other Ladies eyes,
    Then from their beames their jewels lusters rise,               30
  And from their jewels torches do take fire,
    And all is warmth, and light, and good desire;
  Most other Courts, alas, are like to hell,
    Where in darke plotts, fire without light doth dwell:
  Or but like Stoves, for lust and envy get                         35
    Continuall, but artificiall heat;
  Here zeale and love growne one, all clouds disgest,
    And make our Court an everlasting East.
  And can'st thou be from thence?

  _Idios._                No, I am there.
  As heaven, to men dispos'd, is every where,                       40
  So are those Courts, whose Princes animate,
    Not onely all their house, but all their State.
  Let no man thinke, because he is full, he hath all,
    Kings (as their patterne, God) are liberall
  Not onely in fulnesse, but capacitie,                             45
    Enlarging narrow men, to feele and see,
  And comprehend the blessings they bestow.
    So, reclus'd hermits often times do know
  More of heavens glory, then a worldling can.
    As man is of the world, the heart of man,                       50
  Is an epitome of Gods great booke
    Of creatures, and man need no farther looke;
  So is the Country of Courts, where sweet peace doth,
    As their one common soule, give life to both,
  I am not then from Court.

  _Allophanes._
                      Dreamer, thou art.                            55
    Think'st thou fantastique that thou hast a part
  In the East-Indian fleet, because thou hast
    A little spice, or Amber in thy taste?
  Because thou art not frozen, art thou warme?
    Seest thou all good because thou seest no harme?                60
  The earth doth in her inward bowels hold
    Stuffe well dispos'd, and which would faine be gold,
  But never shall, except it chance to lye,
    So upward, that heaven gild it with his eye;
  As, for divine things, faith comes from above,                    65
    So, for best civill use, all tinctures move
  From higher powers; From God religion springs,
    Wisdome, and honour from the use of Kings.
  Then unbeguile thy selfe, and know with mee,
    That Angels, though on earth employd they bee,                  70
  Are still in heav'n, so is hee still at home
    That doth, abroad, to honest actions come.
  Chide thy selfe then, O foole, which yesterday
    Might'st have read more then all thy books bewray;
  Hast thou a history, which doth present                           75
    A Court, where all affections do assent
  Unto the Kings, and that, that Kings are just?
    And where it is no levity to trust?
  Where there is no ambition, but to'obey,
    Where men need whisper nothing, and yet may;                    80
  Where the Kings favours are so plac'd, that all
    Finde that the King therein is liberall
  To them, in him, because his favours bend
    To vertue, to the which they all pretend?
  Thou hast no such; yet here was this, and more,                   85
    An earnest lover, wise then, and before.
  Our little Cupid hath sued Livery,
    And is no more in his minority,
  Hee is admitted now into that brest
    Where the Kings Counsells and his secrets rest.                 90
  What hast thou lost, O ignorant man?

  _Idios._
                                      I knew
  All this, and onely therefore I withdrew.
  To know and feele all this, and not to have
    Words to expresse it, makes a man a grave
  Of his owne thoughts; I would not therefore stay                  95
    At a great feast, having no Grace to say.
  And yet I scap'd not here; for being come
    Full of the common joy, I utter'd some;
  Reade then this nuptiall song, which was not made
    Either the Court or mens hearts to invade,                     100
  But since I'am dead, and buried, I could frame
    No Epitaph, which might advance my fame
  So much as this poore song, which testifies
    I did unto that day some sacrifice.




EPITHALAMION.


I.

_The time of the Mariage_.

  Thou art repriv'd old yeare, thou shalt not die,                 105
      Though thou upon thy death bed lye,
      And should'st within five dayes expire,
  Yet thou art rescu'd by a mightier fire,
      Then thy old Soule, the Sunne,
  When he doth in his largest circle runne.                        110
  The passage of the West or East would thaw,
  And open wide their easie liquid jawe
  To all our ships, could a Promethean art
  Either unto the Northerne Pole impart
  The fire of these inflaming eyes, or of this loving heart.       115


II.

_Equality of persons_.

  But undiscerning Muse, which heart, which eyes,
      In this new couple, dost thou prize,
      When his eye as inflaming is
  As hers, and her heart loves as well as his?
      Be tryed by beauty, and than                                 120
  The bridegroome is a maid, and not a man.
  If by that manly courage they be tryed,
  Which scornes unjust opinion; then the bride
  Becomes a man. Should chance or envies Art
  Divide these two, whom nature scarce did part?                   125
  Since both have both th'enflaming eyes, and both the loving heart.


III.

_Raysing of the Bridegroome_.

  Though it be some divorce to thinke of you
      Singly, so much one are you two,
      Yet let me here contemplate thee,
  First, cheerfull Bridegroome, and first let mee see,             130
      How thou prevent'st the Sunne,
  And his red foming horses dost outrunne,
  How, having laid downe in thy Soveraignes brest
  All businesses, from thence to reinvest
  Them, when these triumphs cease, thou forward art                135
  To shew to her, who doth the like impart,
  The fire of thy inflaming eyes, and of thy loving heart.


IIII.

_Raising of the Bride._

  But now, to Thee, faire Bride, it is some wrong,
      To thinke thou wert in Bed so long,
      Since Soone thou lyest downe first, tis fit                  140
  Thou in first rising should'st allow for it.
        Pouder thy Radiant haire,
  Which if without such ashes thou would'st weare,
  Thou, which to all which come to looke upon,
  Art meant for Phœbus, would'st be Phaëton.                    145
  For our ease, give thine eyes th'unusual part
  Of joy, a Teare; so quencht, thou maist impart,
  To us that come, thy inflaming eyes, to him, thy loving heart.


V.

_Her Apparrelling._

  Thus thou descend'st to our infirmitie,
      Who can the Sun in water see.                                150
      Soe dost thou, when in silke and gold,
  Thou cloudst thy selfe; since wee which doe behold,
        Are dust, and wormes, 'tis just
  Our objects be the fruits of wormes and dust;
  Let every Jewell be a glorious starre,                           155
  Yet starres are not so pure, as their spheares are.
  And though thou stoope, to'appeare to us in part,
  Still in that Picture thou intirely art,
  Which thy inflaming eyes have made within his loving heart.


VI.

_Going to the Chappell._

  Now from your Easts you issue forth, and wee,                    160
      As men which through a Cipres see
      The rising sun, doe thinke it two,
  Soe, as you goe to Church, doe thinke of you,
        But that vaile being gone,
  By the Church rites you are from thenceforth one.                165
  The Church Triumphant made this match before,
  And now the Militant doth strive no more;
  Then, reverend Priest, who Gods Recorder art,
  Doe, from his Dictates, to these two impart
  All blessings, which are seene, or thought, by Angels eye
        or heart.                                                  170


VII.

_The Benediction._

  Blest payre of Swans, Oh may you interbring
      Daily new joyes, and never sing,
      Live, till all grounds of wishes faile,
  Till honor, yea till wisedome grow so stale,
        That, new great heights to trie,                           175
  It must serve your ambition, to die;
  Raise heires, and may here, to the worlds end, live
  Heires from this King, to take thankes, you, to give,
  Nature and grace doe all, and nothing Art.
  May never age, or error overthwart                               180
  With any West, these radiant eyes, with any North, this heart.


VIII.

_Feasts and Revells._

  But you are over-blest. Plenty this day
      Injures; it causeth time to stay;
      The tables groane, as though this feast
  Would, as the flood, destroy all fowle and beast.                185
        And were the doctrine new
  That the earth mov'd, this day would make it true;
  For every part to dance and revell goes.
  They tread the ayre, and fal not where they rose.
  Though six houres since, the Sunne to bed did part,              190
  The masks and banquets will not yet impart
  A sunset to these weary eyes, A Center to this heart.


IX.

_The Brides going to bed._

  What mean'st thou Bride, this companie to keep?
      To sit up, till thou faine wouldst sleep?
      Thou maist not, when thou art laid, doe so.                  195
  Thy selfe must to him a new banquet grow,
        And you must entertaine
  And doe all this daies dances o'r againe.
  Know that if Sun and Moone together doe
  Rise in one point, they doe not set so too;                      200
  Therefore thou maist, faire Bride, to bed depart,
  Thou art not gone, being gone; where e'r thou art,
  Thou leav'st in him thy watchfull eyes, in him thy loving heart.


X.

_The Bridegroomes comming._

  As he that sees a starre fall, runs apace,
      And findes a gellie in the place,                            205
      So doth the Bridegroome hast as much,
  Being told this starre is falne, and findes her such.
        And as friends may looke strange,
  By a new fashion, or apparrells change,
  Their soules, though long acquainted they had beene,             210
  These clothes, their bodies, never yet had seene;
  Therefore at first shee modestly might start,
  But must forthwith surrender every part,
  As freely, as each to each before, gave either eye or heart.


XI.

_The good-night._

  Now, as in Tullias tombe, one lampe burnt cleare,                215
      Unchang'd for fifteene hundred yeare,
      May these love-lamps we here enshrine,
  In warmth, light, lasting, equall the divine.
        Fire ever doth aspire,
  And makes all like it selfe, turnes all to fire,                 220
  But ends in ashes, which these cannot doe,
  For none of these is fuell, but fire too.
  This is joyes bonfire, then, where loves strong Arts
  Make of so noble individuall parts
  One fire of foure inflaming eyes, and of two loving hearts.      225


  _Idios._

  As I have brought this song, that I may doe
      A perfect sacrifice, I'll burne it too.


  _Allophanes._

  No S^{r}. This paper I have justly got,
    For, in burnt incense, the perfume is not
  His only that presents it, but of all;                           230
    What ever celebrates this Festivall
  Is common, since the joy thereof is so.
    Nor may your selfe be Priest: But let me goe,
  Backe to the Court, and I will lay'it upon
    Such Altars, as prize your devotion.                           235



_Epithalamion made at Lincolnes Inne._


  The Sun-beames in the East are spred,
  Leave, leave, faire Bride, your solitary bed,
    No more shall you returne to it alone,
  It nourseth sadnesse, and your bodies print,
  Like to a grave, the yielding downe doth dint;                     5
      You and your other you meet there anon;
      Put forth, put forth that warme balme-breathing thigh,
  Which when next time you in these sheets wil smother,
      There it must meet another,
        Which never was, but must be, oft, more nigh;               10
  Come glad from thence, goe gladder then you came,
  _To day put on perfection, and a womans name_.

  Daughters of London, you which bee
  Our Golden Mines, and furnish'd Treasurie,
    You which are Angels, yet still bring with you                  15
  Thousands of Angels on your mariage daies,
  Help with your presence and devise to praise
    These rites, which also unto you grow due;
    Conceitedly dresse her, and be assign'd,
  By you, fit place for every flower and jewell,                    20
    Make her for love fit fewell
      As gay as Flora, and as rich as Inde;
  So may shee faire, rich, glad, and in nothing lame,
  _To day put on perfection, and a womans name_.
  And you frolique Patricians,                                      25
  Sonns of these Senators wealths deep oceans,
    Ye painted courtiers, barrels of others wits,
  Yee country men, who but your beasts love none,
  Yee of those fellowships whereof hee's one,
    Of study and play made strange Hermaphrodits,                   30
    Here shine; This Bridegroom to the Temple bring.
  Loe, in yon path which store of straw'd flowers graceth,
    The sober virgin paceth;
        Except my sight faile, 'tis no other thing;
  Weep not nor blush, here is no griefe nor shame,                  35
  _To day put on perfection, and a womans name_.

  Thy two-leav'd gates faire Temple unfold,
  And these two in thy sacred bosome hold,
    Till, mystically joyn'd, but one they bee;
  Then may thy leane and hunger-starved wombe                       40
  Long time expect their bodies and their tombe,
    Long after their owne parents fatten thee.
    All elder claimes, and all cold barrennesse,
  All yeelding to new loves bee far for ever,
      Which might these two dissever,                               45
        All wayes all th'other may each one possesse;
  For, the best Bride, best worthy of praise and fame,
  _To day puts on perfection, and a womans name_.

  Oh winter dayes bring much delight,
  Not for themselves, but for they soon bring night;                50
    Other sweets wait thee then these diverse meats,
  Other disports then dancing jollities,
  Other love tricks then glancing with the eyes,
    But that the Sun still in our halfe Spheare sweates;
      Hee flies in winter, but he now stands still.                 55
  Yet shadowes turne; Noone point he hath attain'd,
    His steeds nill bee restrain'd,
      But gallop lively downe the Westerne hill;
  Thou shalt, when he hath runne the worlds half frame,
  _To night put on perfection, and a womans name_.                  60

  The amorous evening starre is rose,
  Why then should not our amorous starre inclose
    Her selfe in her wish'd bed? Release your strings
  Musicians, and dancers take some truce
  With these your pleasing labours, for great use                   65
    As much wearinesse as perfection brings;
      You, and not only you, but all toyl'd beasts
  Rest duly; at night all their toyles are dispensed;
  But in their beds commenced
      Are other labours, and more dainty feasts;                    70
  She goes a maid, who, least she turne the same,
  _To night puts on perfection, and a womans name_.

  Thy virgins girdle now untie,
  And in thy nuptiall bed (loves altar) lye
    A pleasing sacrifice; now dispossesse                           75
  Thee of these chaines and robes which were put on
  T'adorne the day, not thee; for thou, alone,
    Like vertue'and truth, art best in nakednesse;
      This bed is onely to virginitie
  A grave, but, to a better state, a cradle;                        80
  Till now thou wast but able
    To be what now thou art; then that by thee
  No more be said, _I may bee_, but, _I am_,
  _To night put on perfection, and a womans name_.
  Even like a faithfull man content,                                85
  That this life for a better should be spent,
    So, shee a mothers rich stile doth preferre,
  And at the Bridegroomes wish'd approach doth lye,
  Like an appointed lambe, when tenderly
    The priest comes on his knees t'embowell her;                   90
      Now sleep or watch with more joy; and O light
  Of heaven, to morrow rise thou hot, and early;
  This Sun will love so dearely
      Her rest, that long, long we shall want her sight;
  Wonders are wrought, for shee which had no maime,                 95
  _To night puts on perfection, and a womans name_.


SATYRES.


_Satyre I._

  Away thou fondling motley humorist,
  Leave mee, and in this standing woodden chest,
  Consorted with these few bookes, let me lye
  In prison, and here be coffin'd, when I dye;
  Here are Gods conduits, grave Divines; and here                    5
  Natures Secretary, the Philosopher;
  And jolly Statesmen, which teach how to tie
  The sinewes of a cities mistique bodie;
  Here gathering Chroniclers, and by them stand
  Giddie fantastique Poëts of each land.                            10
  Shall I leave all this constant company,
  And follow headlong, wild uncertaine thee?
  First sweare by thy best love in earnest
  (If thou which lov'st all, canst love any best)
  Thou wilt not leave mee in the middle street,                     15
  Though some more spruce companion thou dost meet,
  Not though a Captaine do come in thy way
  Bright parcell gilt, with forty dead mens pay,
  Not though a briske perfum'd piert Courtier
  Deigne with a nod, thy courtesie to answer.                       20
  Nor come a velvet Justice with a long
  Great traine of blew coats, twelve, or fourteen strong,
  Wilt thou grin or fawne on him, or prepare
  A speech to Court his beautious sonne and heire!
  For better or worse take mee, or leave mee:                       25
  To take, and leave mee is adultery.
  Oh monstrous, superstitious puritan,
  Of refin'd manners, yet ceremoniall man,
  That when thou meet'st one, with enquiring eyes
  Dost search, and like a needy broker prize                        30
  The silke, and gold he weares, and to that rate
  So high or low, dost raise thy formall hat:
  That wilt consort none, untill thou have knowne
  What lands hee hath in hope, or of his owne,
  As though all thy companions should make thee                     35
  Jointures, and marry thy deare company.
  Why should'st thou (that dost not onely approve,
  But in ranke itchie lust, desire, and love
  The nakednesse and barenesse to enjoy,
  Of thy plumpe muddy whore, or prostitute boy)                     40
  Hate vertue, though shee be naked, and bare?
  At birth, and death, our bodies naked are;
  And till our Soules be unapparrelled
  Of bodies, they from blisse are banished.
  Mans first blest state was naked, when by sinne                   45
  Hee lost that, yet hee was cloath'd but in beasts skin,
  And in this course attire, which I now weare,
  With God, and with the Muses I conferre.
  But since thou like a contrite penitent,
  Charitably warn'd of thy sinnes, dost repent                      50
  These vanities, and giddinesses, loe
  I shut my chamber doore, and come, lets goe.
  But sooner may a cheape whore, who hath beene
  Worne by as many severall men in sinne,
  As are black feathers, or musk-colour hose,                       55
  Name her childs right true father, 'mongst all those:
  Sooner may one guesse, who shall beare away
  The Infanta of London, Heire to an India;
  And sooner may a gulling weather Spie
  By drawing forth heavens Scheme tell certainly                    60
  What fashioned hats, or ruffes, or suits next yeare
  Our subtile-witted antique youths will weare;
  Then thou, when thou depart'st from mee, canst show
  Whither, why, when, or with whom thou wouldst go.
  But how shall I be pardon'd my offence                            65
  That thus have sinn'd against my conscience?
  Now we are in the street; He first of all
  Improvidently proud, creepes to the wall,
  And so imprisoned, and hem'd in by mee
  Sells for a little state his libertie;                            70
  Yet though he cannot skip forth now to greet
  Every fine silken painted foole we meet,
  He them to him with amorous smiles allures,
  And grins, smacks, shrugs, and such an itch endures,
  As prentises, or schoole-boyes which doe know                     75
  Of some gay sport abroad, yet dare not goe.
  And as fidlers stop lowest, at highest sound,
  So to the most brave, stoops hee nigh'st the ground.
  But to a grave man, he doth move no more
  Then the wise politique horse would heretofore,                   80
  Or thou O Elephant or Ape wilt doe,
  When any names the King of Spaine to you.
  Now leaps he upright, Joggs me, & cryes, Do you see
  Yonder well favoured youth? Which? Oh, 'tis hee
  That dances so divinely; Oh, said I,                              85
  Stand still, must you dance here for company?
  Hee droopt, wee went, till one (which did excell
  Th'Indians, in drinking his Tobacco well)
  Met us; they talk'd; I whispered, let'us goe,
  'T may be you smell him not, truely I doe;                        90
  He heares not mee, but, on the other side
  A many-coloured Peacock having spide,
  Leaves him and mee; I for my lost sheep stay;
  He followes, overtakes, goes on the way,
  Saying, him whom I last left, all repute                          95
  For his device, in hansoming a sute,
  To judge of lace, pinke, panes, print, cut, and plight,
  Of all the Court, to have the best conceit;
  Our dull Comedians want him, let him goe;
  But Oh, God strengthen thee, why stoop'st thou so?               100
  Why? he hath travayld; Long? No; but to me
  (Which understand none,) he doth seeme to be
  Perfect French, and Italian; I replyed,
  So is the Poxe; He answered not, but spy'd
  More men of fort, of parts, and qualities;                       105
  At last his Love he in a windowe spies,
  And like light dew exhal'd, he flings from mee
  Violently ravish'd to his lechery.
  Many were there, he could command no more;
  Hee quarrell'd fought, bled; and turn'd out of dore              110
    Directly came to mee hanging the head,
    And constantly a while must keepe his bed.



_Satyre II._

  Sir; though (I thanke God for it) I do hate
  Perfectly all this towne, yet there's one state
  In all ill things so excellently best,
  That hate, toward them, breeds pitty towards the rest.
  Though Poëtry indeed be such a sinne                               5
  As I thinke that brings dearths, and Spaniards in,
  Though like the Pestilence and old fashion'd love,
  Ridlingly it catch men; and doth remove
  Never, till it be sterv'd out; yet their state
  Is poore, disarm'd, like Papists, not worth hate.                 10
  One, (like a wretch, which at Barre judg'd as dead,
  Yet prompts him which stands next, and cannot reade,
  And saves his life) gives ideot actors meanes
  (Starving himselfe) to live by his labor'd sceanes;
  As in some Organ, Puppits dance above                             15
  And bellows pant below, which them do move.
  One would move Love by rithmes; but witchcrafts charms
  Bring not now their old feares, nor their old harmes:
  Rammes, and slings now are seely battery,
  Pistolets are the best Artillerie.                                20
  And they who write to Lords, rewards to get,
  Are they not like singers at doores for meat?
  And they who write, because all write, have still
  That excuse for writing, and for writing ill;
  But hee is worst, who (beggarly) doth chaw                        25
  Others wits fruits, and in his ravenous maw
  Rankly digested, doth those things out-spue,
  As his owne things; and they are his owne, 'tis true,
  For if one eate my meate, though it be knowne
  The meate was mine, th'excrement is his owne:                     30
  But these do mee no harme, nor they which use
  To out-doe Dildoes, and out-usure Jewes;
  To out-drinke the sea, to out-sweare the Letanie;
  Who with sinnes all kindes as familiar bee
  As Confessors; and for whose sinfull sake,                        35
  Schoolemen new tenements in hell must make:
  Whose strange sinnes, Canonists could hardly tell
  In which Commandements large receit they dwell.
  But these punish themselves; the insolence
  Of Coscus onely breeds my just offence,                           40
  Whom time (which rots all, and makes botches poxe,
  And plodding on, must make a calfe an oxe)
  Hath made a Lawyer, which was (alas) of late
  But a scarce Poët; jollier of this state,
  Then are new benefic'd ministers, he throwes                      45
  Like nets, or lime-twigs, wheresoever he goes,
  His title of Barrister, on every wench,
  And wooes in language of the Pleas, and Bench:
  A motion, Lady; Speake Coscus; I have beene
  In love, ever since _tricesimo_ of the Queene,                    50
  Continuall claimes I have made, injunctions got
  To stay my rivals suit, that hee should not
  Proceed; spare mee; In Hillary terme I went,
  You said, If I return'd next size in Lent,
  I should be in remitter of your grace;                            55
  In th'interim my letters should take place
  Of affidavits: words, words, which would teare
  The tender labyrinth of a soft maids eare,
  More, more, then ten Sclavonians scolding, more
  Then when winds in our ruin'd Abbeyes rore.                       60
  When sicke with Poëtrie, and possest with muse
  Thou wast, and mad, I hop'd; but men which chuse
  Law practise for meere gaine, bold soule, repute
  Worse then imbrothel'd strumpets prostitute.
  Now like an owlelike watchman, hee must walke                     65
  His hand still at a bill, now he must talke
  Idly, like prisoners, which whole months will sweare
  That onely suretiship hath brought them there,
  And to every suitor lye in every thing,
  Like a Kings favourite, yea like a King;                          70
  Like a wedge in a blocke, wring to the barre,
  Bearing-like Asses; and more shamelesse farre
  Then carted whores, lye, to the grave Judge; for
  Bastardy abounds not in Kings titles, nor
  Symonie and Sodomy in Churchmens lives,                           75
  As these things do in him; by these he thrives.
  Shortly (as the sea) hee will compasse all our land;
  From Scots, to Wight; from Mount, to Dover strand.
  And spying heires melting with luxurie,
  Satan will not joy at their sinnes, as hee.                       80
  For as a thrifty wench scrapes kitching-stuffe,
  And barrelling the droppings, and the snuffe,
  Of wasting candles, which in thirty yeare
  (Relique-like kept) perchance buyes wedding geare;
  Peecemeale he gets lands, and spends as much time                 85
  Wringing each Acre, as men pulling prime.
  In parchments then, large as his fields, hee drawes
  Assurances, bigge, as gloss'd civill lawes,
  So huge, that men (in our times forwardnesse)
  Are Fathers of the Church for writing lesse.                      90
  These hee writes not; nor for these written payes,
  Therefore spares no length; as in those first dayes
  When Luther was profest, He did desire
  Short _Pater nosters_, saying as a Fryer
  Each day his beads, but having left those lawes,                  95
  Addes to Christs prayer, the Power and glory clause.
  But when he sells or changes land, he'impaires
  His writings, and (unwatch'd) leaves out, _ses heires_,
  As slily as any Commenter goes by
  Hard words, or sense; or in Divinity                             100
  As controverters, in vouch'd Texts, leave out
  Shrewd words, which might against them cleare the doubt.
  Where are those spred woods which cloth'd hertofore
  Those bought lands? not built, nor burnt within dore.
  Where's th'old landlords troops, and almes? In great hals        106
  Carthusian fasts, and fulsome Bachanalls
  Equally I hate; meanes blesse; in rich mens homes
  I bid kill some beasts, but no Hecatombs,
  None starve, none surfet so; But (Oh) we allow,
  Good workes as good, but out of fashion now,                     110
  Like old rich wardrops; but my words none drawes
  Within the vast reach of th'huge statute lawes.


_Satyre III._

  Kinde pitty chokes my spleene; brave scorn forbids
  Those teares to issue which swell my eye-lids;
  I must not laugh, nor weepe sinnes, and be wise,
  Can railing then cure these worne maladies?
  Is not our Mistresse faire Religion,                               5
  As worthy of all our Soules devotion,
  As vertue was to the first blinded age?
  Are not heavens joyes as valiant to asswage
  Lusts, as earths honour was to them? Alas,
  As wee do them in meanes, shall they surpasse                     10
  Us in the end, and shall thy fathers spirit
  Meete blinde Philosophers in heaven, whose merit
  Of strict life may be imputed faith, and heare
  Thee, whom hee taught so easie wayes and neare
  To follow, damn'd? O if thou dar'st, feare this;                  15
  This feare great courage, and high valour is.
  Dar'st thou ayd mutinous Dutch, and dar'st thou lay
  Thee in ships woodden Sepulchers, a prey
  To leaders rage, to stormes, to shot, to dearth?
  Dar'st thou dive seas, and dungeons of the earth?                 20
  Hast thou couragious fire to thaw the ice
  Of frozen North discoueries? and thrise
  Colder then Salamanders, like divine
  Children in th'oven, fires of Spaine, and the line,
  Whose countries limbecks to our bodies bee,                       25
  Canst thou for gaine beare? and must every hee
  Which cryes not, Goddesse, to thy Mistresse, draw,
  Or eate thy poysonous words? courage of straw!
  O desperate coward, wilt thou seeme bold, and
  To thy foes and his (who made thee to stand                       30
  Sentinell in his worlds garrison) thus yeeld,
  And for forbidden warres, leave th'appointed field?
  Know thy foes: The foule Devill (whom thou
  Strivest to please,) for hate, not love, would allow
  Thee faine, his whole Realme to be quit; and as                   35
  The worlds all parts wither away and passe,
  So the worlds selfe, thy other lov'd foe, is
  In her decrepit wayne, and thou loving this,
  Dost love a withered and worne strumpet; last,
  Flesh (it selfes death) and joyes which flesh can taste,          40
  Thou loveft; and thy faire goodly soule, which doth
  Give this flesh power to taste joy, thou dost loath.
  Seeke true religion. O where? Mirreus
  Thinking her unhous'd here, and fled from us,
  Seekes her at Rome; there, because hee doth know                  45
  That shee was there a thousand yeares agoe,
  He loves her ragges so, as wee here obey
  The statecloth where the Prince sate yesterday.
  Crantz to such brave Loves will not be inthrall'd,
  But loves her onely, who at Geneva is call'd                      50
  Religion, plaine, simple, sullen, yong,
  Contemptuous, yet unhansome; As among
  Lecherous humors, there is one that judges
  No wenches wholsome, but course country drudges.
  Graius stayes still at home here, and because                     55
  Some Preachers, vile ambitious bauds, and lawes
  Still new like fashions, bid him thinke that shee
  Which dwels with us, is onely perfect, hee
  Imbraceth her, whom his Godfathers will
  Tender to him, being tender, as Wards still                       60
  Take such wives as their Guardians offer, or
  Pay valewes. Carelesse Phrygius doth abhorre
  All, because all cannot be good, as one
  Knowing some women whores, dares marry none.
  Graccus loves all as one, and thinkes that so                     65
  As women do in divers countries goe
  In divers habits, yet are still one kinde,
  So doth, so is Religion; and this blind-
  nesse too much light breeds; but unmoved thou
  Of force must one, and forc'd but one allow;                      70
  And the right; aske thy father which is shee,
  Let him aske his; though truth and falshood bee
  Neare twins, yet truth a little elder is;
  Be busie to seeke her, beleeve mee this,
  Hee's not of none, nor worst, that seekes the best.               75
  To adore, or scorne an image, or protest,
  May all be bad; doubt wisely; in strange way
  To stand inquiring right, is not to stray;
  To sleepe, or runne wrong, is. On a huge hill,
  Cragged, and steep, Truth stands, and hee that will               80
  Reach her, about must, and about must goe;
  And what the hills suddennes resists, winne so;
  Yet strive so, that before age, deaths twilight,
  Thy Soule rest, for none can worke in that night.
  To will, implyes delay, therefore now doe:                        85
  Hard deeds, the bodies paines; hard knowledge too
  The mindes indeavours reach, and mysteries
  Are like the Sunne, dazling, yet plaine to all eyes.
  Keepe the truth which thou hast found; men do not stand
  In so ill case here, that God hath with his hand                  90
  Sign'd Kings blanck-charters to kill whom they hate,
  Nor are they Vicars, but hangmen to Fate.
  Foole and wretch, wilt thou let thy Soule be tyed
  To mans lawes, by which she shall not be tryed
  At the last day? Oh, will it then boot thee                       95
  To say a Philip, or a Gregory,
  A Harry, or a Martin taught thee this?
  Is not this excuse for mere contraries,
  Equally strong? cannot both sides say so?
  That thou mayest rightly obey power, her bounds know;            100
  Those past, her nature, and name is chang'd; to be
  Then humble to her is idolatrie.
  As streames are, Power is; those blest flowers that dwell
  At the rough streames calme head, thrive and do well,
  But having left their roots, and themselves given                105
  To the streames tyrannous rage, alas, are driven
  Through mills, and rockes, and woods, and at last, almost
  Consum'd in going, in the sea are lost:
  So perish Soules, which more chuse mens unjust
  Power from God claym'd, then God himselfe to trust.              110


_Satyr IIII._

  Well; I may now receive, and die; My sinne
  Indeed is great, but I have beene in
  A Purgatorie, such as fear'd hell is
  A recreation to, and scarse map of this.
  My minde, neither with prides itch, nor yet hath been              5
  Poyson'd with love to see, or to bee seene,
  I had no suit there, nor new suite to shew,
  Yet went to Court; But as Glaze which did goe
  To'a Masse in jest, catch'd, was faine to disburse
  The hundred markes, which is the Statutes curse;                  10
  Before he scapt, So'it pleas'd my destinie
  (Guilty of my sin of going,) to thinke me
  As prone to all ill, and of good as forget-
  full, as proud, as lustfull, and as much in debt,
  As vaine, as witlesse, and as false as they                       15
  Which dwell at Court, for once going that way.
  Therefore I suffered this; Towards me did runne
  A thing more strange, then on Niles slime, the Sunne
  E'r bred; or all which into Noahs Arke came;
  A thing, which would have pos'd Adam to name;                     20
  Stranger then seaven Antiquaries studies,
  Then Africks Monsters, Guianaes rarities.
  Stranger then strangers; One, who for a Dane,
  In the Danes Massacre had sure beene slaine,
  If he had liv'd then; And without helpe dies,                     25
  When next the Prentises'gainst Strangers rise.
  One, whom the watch at noone lets scarce goe by,
  One, to whom, the examining Justice sure would cry,
  Sir, by your priesthood tell me what you are.
  His cloths were strange, though coarse; and black, though bare;   30
  Sleevelesse his jerkin was, and it had beene
  Velvet, but'twas now (so much ground was seene)
  Become Tufftaffatie; and our children shall
  See it plaine Rashe awhile, then nought at all.
  This thing hath travail'd, and saith, speakes all tongues         35
  And only knoweth what to all States belongs.
  Made of th'Accents, and best phrase of all these,
  He speakes no language; If strange meats displease,
  Art can deceive, or hunger force my tast,
  But Pedants motley tongue, souldiers bumbast,                     40
  Mountebankes drugtongue, nor the termes of law
  Are strong enough preparatives, to draw
  Me to beare this: yet I must be content
  With his tongue, in his tongue, call'd complement:
  In which he can win widdowes, and pay scores,                     45
  Make men speake treason, cosen subtlest whores,
  Out-flatter favorites, or outlie either
  Jovius, or Surius, or both together.
  He names mee, and comes to mee; I whisper, God!
  How have I sinn'd, that thy wraths furious rod,                   50
  This fellow chuseth me? He saith, Sir,
  I love your judgement; Whom doe you prefer,
  For the best linguist? And I seelily
  Said, that I thought Calepines Dictionarie;
  Nay, but of men, most sweet Sir; Beza then,                       55
  Some other Jesuites, and two reverend men
  Of our two Academies, I named; There
  He stopt mee, and said; Nay, your Apostles were
  Good pretty linguists, and so Panurge was;
  Yet a poore gentleman, all these may passe                        60
  By travaile. Then, as if he would have sold
  His tongue, he prais'd it, and such wonders told
  That I was faine to say, If you'had liv'd, Sir,
  Time enough to have beene Interpreter
  To Babells bricklayers, sure the Tower had stood.                 65
  He adds, If of court life you knew the good,
  You would leave lonenesse. I said, not alone
  My lonenesse is, but Spartanes fashion,
  To teach by painting drunkards, doth not last
  Now; Aretines pictures have made few chast;                       70
  No more can Princes courts, though there be few
  Better pictures of vice, teach me vertue;
  He, like to a high stretcht lute string squeakt, O Sir,
  'Tis sweet to talke of Kings. At Westminster,
  Said I, The man that keepes the Abbey tombes,                     75
  And for his price doth with who ever comes,
  Of all our Harries, and our Edwards talke,
  From King to King and all their kin can walke:
  Your eares shall heare nought, but Kings; your eyes meet
  Kings only; The way to it, is Kingstreet.                         80
  He smack'd, and cry'd, He's base, Mechanique, coarse,
  So are all your Englishmen in their discourse.
  Are not your Frenchmen neate? Mine? as you see,
  I have but one Frenchman, looke, hee followes mee.
  Certes they are neatly cloth'd; I, of this minde am,              85
  Your only wearing is your Grogaram.
  Not so Sir, I have more. Under this pitch
  He would not flie; I chaff'd him; But as Itch
  Scratch'd into smart, and as blunt iron ground
  Into an edge, hurts worse: So, I (foole) found,                   90
  Crossing hurt mee; To fit my sullennesse,
  He to another key, his stile doth addresse,
  And askes, what newes? I tell him of new playes.
  He takes my hand, and as a Still, which staies
  A Sembriefe, 'twixt each drop, he nigardly,                       95
  As loth to enrich mee, so tells many a lye.
  More then ten Hollensheads, or Halls, or Stowes,
  Of triviall houshold trash he knowes; He knowes
  When the Queene frown'd, or smil'd, and he knowes what
  A subtle States-man may gather of that;                          100
  He knowes who loves; whom; and who by poyson
  Hasts to an Offices reversion;
  He knowes who'hath sold his land, and now doth beg
  A licence, old iron, bootes, shooes, and egge-
  shels to transport; Shortly boyes shall not play                 105
  At span-counter, or blow-point, but they pay
  Toll to some Courtier; And wiser then all us,
  He knowes what Ladie is not painted; Thus
  He with home-meats tries me; I belch, spue, spit,
  Looke pale, and sickly, like a Patient; Yet                      110
  He thrusts on more; And as if he'd undertooke
  To say Gallo-Belgicus without booke
  Speakes of all States, and deeds, that have been since
  The Spaniards came, to the losse of Amyens.
  Like a bigge wife, at sight of loathed meat,                     115
  Readie to travaile: So I sigh, and sweat
  To heare this Makeron talke: In vaine; for yet,
  Either my humour, or his owne to fit,
  He like a priviledg'd spie, whom nothing can
  Discredit, Libells now'gainst each great man.                    120
  He names a price for every office paid;
  He saith, our warres thrive ill, because delai'd;
  That offices are entail'd, and that there are
  Perpetuities of them, lasting as farre
  As the last day; And that great officers,                        125
  Doe with the Pirates share, and Dunkirkers.
  Who wasts in meat, in clothes, in horse, he notes;
  Who loves whores, who boyes, and who goats.
  I more amas'd then Circes prisoners, when
  They felt themselves turne beasts, felt my selfe then            130
  Becomming Traytor, and mee thought I saw
  One of our Giant Statutes ope his jaw
  To sucke me in; for hearing him, I found
  That as burnt venome Leachers do grow sound
  By giving others their soares, I might growe                     135
  Guilty, and he free: Therefore I did shew
  All signes of loathing; But since I am in,
  I must pay mine, and my forefathers sinne
  To the last farthing; Therefore to my power
  Toughly and stubbornly I beare this crosse; But the'houre        140
  Of mercy now was come; He tries to bring
  Me to pay a fine to scape his torturing,
  And saies, Sir, can you spare me; I said, willingly;
  Nay, Sir, can you spare me a crowne? Thankfully I
  Gave it, as Ransome; But as fidlers, still,                      145
  Though they be paid to be gone, yet needs will
  Thrust one more jigge upon you: so did hee
  With his long complementall thankes vexe me.
  But he is gone, thankes to his needy want,
  And the prerogative of my Crowne: Scant                          150
  His thankes were ended, when I, (which did see
  All the court fill'd with more strange things then hee)
  Ran from thence with such or more hast, then one
  Who feares more actions, doth make from prison.
  At home in wholesome solitarinesse                               155
  My precious soule began, the wretchednesse
  Of suiters at court to mourne, and a trance
  Like his, who dreamt he saw hell, did advance
  It selfe on mee, Such men as he saw there,
  I saw at court, and worse, and more; Low feare                   160
  Becomes the guiltie, not the accuser; Then,
  Shall I, nones slave, of high borne, or rais'd men
  Feare frownes? And, my Mistresse Truth, betray thee
  To th'huffing braggart, puft Nobility?
  No, no, Thou which since yesterday hast beene                    165
  Almost about the whole world, hast thou seene,
  O Sunne, in all thy journey, Vanitie,
  Such as swells the bladder of our court? I
  Thinke he which made your waxen garden, and
  Transported it from Italy to stand                               170
  With us, at London, flouts our Presence, for
  Just such gay painted things, which no sappe, nor
  Tast have in them, ours are; And naturall
  Some of the stocks are, their fruits, bastard all.
  'Tis ten a clock and past; All whom the Mues,                    175
  Baloune, Tennis, Dyet, or the stewes,
  Had all the morning held, now the second
  Time made ready, that day, in flocks, are found
  In the Presence, and I, (God pardon mee.)
  As fresh, and sweet their Apparrells be, as bee                  180
  The fields they sold to buy them; For a King
  Those hose are, cry the flatterers; And bring
  Them next weeke to the Theatre to sell;
  Wants reach all states; Me seemes they doe as well
  At stage, as court; All are players; who e'r lookes              185
  (For themselves dare not goe) o'r Cheapside books,
  Shall finde their wardrops Inventory. Now,
  The Ladies come; As Pirats, which doe know
  That there came weak ships fraught with Cutchannel,
  The men board them; and praise, as they thinke, well,            190
  Their beauties; they the mens wits; Both are bought.
  Why good wits ne'r weare scarlet gownes, I thought
  This cause, These men, mens wits for speeches buy,
  And women buy all reds which scarlets die.
  He call'd her beauty limetwigs, her haire net;                   195
  She feares her drugs ill laid, her haire loose set.
  Would not Heraclitus laugh to see Macrine,
  From hat to shooe, himselfe at doore refine,
  As if the Presence were a Moschite, and lift
  His skirts and hose, and call his clothes to shrift,             200
  Making them confesse not only mortall
  Great staines and holes in them; but veniall
  Feathers and dust, wherewith they fornicate:
  And then by _Durers_ rules survay the state
  Of his each limbe, and with strings the odds trye                205
  Of his neck to his legge, and wast to thighe.
  So in immaculate clothes, and Symetrie
  Perfect as circles, with such nicetie
  As a young Preacher at his first time goes
  To preach, he enters, and a Lady which owes                      210
  Him not so much as good will, he arrests,
  And unto her protests protests protests,
  So much as at Rome would serve to have throwne
  Ten Cardinalls into the Inquisition;
  And whisperd by Jesu, so often, that A                           215
  Pursevant would have ravish'd him away
  For saying of our Ladies psalter; But'tis fit
  That they each other plague, they merit it.
  But here comes Glorius that will plague them both,
  Who, in the other extreme, only doth                             220
  Call a rough carelessenesse, good fashion;
  Whose cloak his spurres teare; whom he spits on
  He cares not, His ill words doe no harme
  To him; he rusheth in, as if arme, arme,
  He meant to crie; And though his face be as ill                  225
  As theirs which in old hangings whip Christ, still
  He strives to looke worse, he keepes all in awe;
  Jeasts like a licenc'd foole, commands like law.
  Tyr'd, now I leave this place, and but pleas'd so
  As men which from gaoles to execution goe,                       230
  Goe through the great chamber (why is it hung
  With the seaven deadly sinnes?). Being among
  Those Askaparts, men big enough to throw
  Charing Crosse for a barre, men that doe know
  No token of worth, but Queenes man, and fine                     235
  Living, barrells of beefe, flaggons of wine;
  I shooke like a spyed Spie. Preachers which are
  Seas of Wit and Arts, you can, then dare,
  Drowne the sinnes of this place, for, for mee
  Which am but a scarce brooke, it enough shall bee                240
  To wash the staines away; Although I yet
  With _Macchabees_ modestie, the knowne merit
  Of my worke lessen: yet some wise man shall,
  I hope, esteeme my writs Canonicall.


_Satyre V._

  Thou shalt not laugh in this leafe, Muse, nor they
  Whom any pitty warmes; He which did lay
  Rules to make Courtiers, (hee being understood
  May make good Courtiers, but who Courtiers good?)
  Frees from the sting of jests all who in extreme                   5
  Are wreched or wicked: of these two a theame
  Charity and liberty give me. What is hee
  Who Officers rage, and Suiters misery
  Can write, and jest? If all things be in all,
  As I thinke, since all, which were, are, and shall                10
  Bee, be made of the same elements:
  Each thing, each thing implyes or represents.
  Then man is a world; in which, Officers
  Are the vast ravishing seas; and Suiters,
  Springs; now full, now shallow, now drye; which, to               15
  That which drownes them, run: These selfe reasons do
  Prove the world a man, in which, officers
  Are the devouring stomacke, and Suiters
  The excrements, which they voyd. All men are dust;
  How much worse are Suiters, who to mens lust                      20
  Are made preyes? O worse then dust, or wormes meat,
  For they do eate you now, whose selves wormes shall eate.
  They are the mills which grinde you, yet you are
  The winde which drives them; and a wastfull warre
  Is fought against you, and you fight it; they                     25
  Adulterate lawe, and you prepare their way
  Like wittals; th'issue your owne ruine is.
  Greatest and fairest Empresse, know you this?
  Alas, no more then Thames calme head doth know
  Whose meades her armes drowne, or whose corne o'rflow:            30
  You Sir, whose righteousnes she loves, whom I
  By having leave to serve, am most richly
  For service paid, authoriz'd, now beginne
  To know and weed out this enormous sinne.
  O Age of rusty iron! Some better wit                              35
  Call it some worse name, if ought equall it;
  The iron Age _that_ was, when justice was sold; now
  Injustice is sold dearer farre. Allow
  All demands, fees, and duties, gamsters, anon
  The mony which you sweat, and sweare for, is gon                  40
  Into other hands: So controverted lands
  Scape, like Angelica, the strivers hands.
  If Law be in the Judges heart, and hee
  Have no heart to resist letter, or fee,
  Where wilt thou appeale? powre of the Courts below                45
  Flow from the first maine head, and these can throw
  Thee, if they sucke thee in, to misery,
  To fetters, halters; But if the injury
  Steele thee to dare complaine, Alas, thou go'st
  Against the stream, when upwards: when thou art most              50
  Heavy and most faint; and in these labours they,
  'Gainst whom thou should'st complaine, will in the way
  Become great seas, o'r which, when thou shalt bee
  Forc'd to make golden bridges, thou shalt see
  That all thy gold was drown'd in them before;                     55
  All things follow their like, only who have may have more.
  Judges are Gods; he who made and said them so,
  Meant not that men should be forc'd to them to goe,
  By meanes of Angels; When supplications
  We send to God, to Dominations,                                   60
  Powers, Cherubins, and all heavens Courts, if wee
  Should pay fees as here, Daily bread would be
  Scarce to Kings; so 'tis. Would it not anger
  A Stoicke, a coward, yea a Martyr,
  To see a Pursivant come in, and call                              65
  All his cloathes, Copes; Bookes, Primers; and all
  His Plate, Challices; and mistake them away,
  And aske a fee for comming? Oh, ne'r may
  Faire lawes white reverend name be strumpeted,
  To warrant thefts: she is established                             70
  Recorder to Destiny, on earth, and shee
  Speakes Fates words, and but tells us who must bee
  Rich, who poore, who in chaires, who in jayles:
  Shee is all faire, but yet hath foule long nailes,
  With which she scracheth Suiters; In bodies                       75
  Of men, so in law, nailes are th'extremities,
  So Officers stretch to more then Law can doe,
  As our nailes reach what no else part comes to.
  Why barest thou to yon Officer? Foole, Hath hee
  Got those goods, for which erst men bar'd to thee?                80
  Foole, twice, thrice, thou hast bought wrong, and now hungerly
  Beg'st right; But that dole comes not till these dye.
  Thou had'st much, and lawes Urim and Thummim trie
  Thou wouldst for more; and for all hast paper
  Enough to cloath all the great Carricks Pepper.                   85
  Sell that, and by that thou much more shalt leese,
  Then Haman, when he sold his Antiquities.
  O wretch that thy fortunes should moralize
  Esops fables, and make tales, prophesies.
  Thou'art the swimming dog whom shadows cosened,                   90
  And div'st, neare drowning, for what's vanished.


_Vpon Mr. Thomas Coryats Crudities._

  Oh to what height will love of greatnesse drive
  Thy leavened spirit, _Sesqui-superlative_?
  Venice vast lake thou hadst seen, and would seek than
  Some vaster thing, and found'st a Curtizan.
  That inland Sea having discovered well,                            5
  A Cellar gulfe, where one might saile to hell
  From Heydelberg, thou longdst to see: And thou
  This Booke, greater then all, producest now.
  Infinite worke, which doth so far extend,
  That none can study it to any end.                                10
  'Tis no one thing, it is not fruit nor roote;
  Nor poorely limited with head or foot.
  If man be therefore man, because he can
  Reason, and laugh, thy booke doth halfe make man.
  One halfe being made, thy modestie was such,                      15
  That thou on th'other half wouldst never touch.
  When wilt thou be at full, great Lunatique?
  Not till thou exceed the world? Canst thou be like
  A prosperous nose-borne wenne, which sometimes growes
  To be farre greater then the Mother-nose?                         20
  Goe then; and as to thee, when thou didst go,
  _Munster_ did Townes, and _Gesner_ Authors show,
  Mount now to _Gallo-belgicus_; appear
  As deepe a States-man, as a Gazettier.
  Homely and familiarly, when thou com'st back,                     25
  Talke of _Will. Conquerour_, and _Prester Iack_.
  Go bashfull man, lest here thou blush to looke
  Vpon the progresse of thy glorious booke,
  To which both Indies sacrifices send;
  The West sent gold, which thou didst freely spend,                30
  (Meaning to see't no more) upon the presse.
  The East sends hither her deliciousnesse;
  And thy leaves must imbrace what comes from thence,
  The Myrrhe, the Pepper, and the Frankincense.
  This magnifies thy leaves; but if they stoope                     35
  To neighbour wares, when Merchants do unhoope
  Voluminous barrels; if thy leaves do then
  Convey these wares in parcels unto men;
  If for vast Tons of Currans, and of Figs,
  Of Medicinall and Aromatique twigs,                               40
  Thy leaves a better method do provide,
  Divide to pounds, and ounces sub-divide;
  If they stoope lower yet, and vent our wares,
  Home-_manufactures_, to thick popular Faires,
  If _omni-praegnant_ there, upon warme stalls,                     45
  They hatch all wares for which the buyer calls;
  Then thus thy leaves we justly may commend,
  That they all kinde of matter comprehend.
  Thus thou, by means which th'Ancients never took,
  A Pandect makest, and Vniversall Booke.                           50
  The bravest Heroes, for publike good,
  Scattered in divers Lands their limbs and blood.
  Worst malefactors, to whom men are prize,
  Do publike good, cut in Anatomies;
  So will thy booke in peeces; for a Lord                           55
  Which casts at Portescues, and all the board,
  Provide whole books; each leafe enough will be
  For friends to passe time, and keep company.
  Can all carouse up thee? no, thou must fit
  Measures; and fill out for the half-pint wit:                     60
  Some shall wrap pils, and save a friends life so,
  Some shall stop muskets, and so kill a foe.
  Thou shalt not ease the Criticks of next age
  So much, at once their hunger to asswage:
  Nor shall wit-pirats hope to finde thee lye                       65
  All in one bottome, in one Librarie.
  Some Leaves may paste strings there in other books,
  And so one may, which on another looks,
  Pilfer, alas, a little wit from you;
  But hardly much; and yet I think this true;                    70
  As _Sibyls_ was, your booke is mysticall,
  For every peece is as much worth as all.
  Therefore mine impotency I confesse,
  The healths which my braine bears must be far lesse:
  Thy Gyant-wit'orethrowes me, I am gone;                           75
  And rather then read all, I would reade none.

  _I. D._


_In eundem Macaronicon._

  _Quot, dos haec_, +Linguists+ perfetti, _Disticha_ fairont,
  _Tot_ cuerdos +States-men+, _hic_ livre fara _tuus_.
  Es _sat_ a my l'honneur estre hic inteso; Car +I leave+
  L'honra, de personne nestre creduto, _tibi_.

  _Explicit Joannes Donne._





THE STORME.

To Mr. _Christopher Brooke_.


  Thou which art I, ('tis nothing to be soe)
  Thou which art still thy selfe, by these shalt know
  Part of our passage; And, a hand, or eye
  By _Hilliard_ drawne, is worth an history,
  By a worse painter made; and (without pride)                       5
  When by thy judgment they are dignifi'd,
  My lines are such: 'Tis the preheminence
  Of friendship onely to'impute excellence.
  England to whom we'owe, what we be, and have,
  Sad that her sonnes did seeke a forraine grave                    10
  (For, Fates, or Fortunes drifts none can soothsay,
  Honour and misery have one face and way.)
  From out her pregnant intrailes sigh'd a winde
  Which at th'ayres middle marble roome did finde
  Such strong resistance, that it selfe it threw                    15
  Downeward againe; and so when it did view
  How in the port, our fleet deare time did leese,
  Withering like prisoners, which lye but for fees,
  Mildly it kist our sailes, and, fresh and sweet,
  As to a stomack sterv'd, whose insides meete,                     20
  Meate comes, it came; and swole our sailes, when wee
  So joyd, as _Sara_'her swelling joy'd to see.
  But 'twas but so kinde, as our countrimen,
  Which bring friends one dayes way, and leave them then.
  Then like two mighty Kings, which dwelling farre                  25
  Asunder, meet against a third to warre,
  The South and West winds joyn'd, and, as they blew,
  Waves like a rowling trench before them threw.
  Sooner then you read this line, did the gale,
  Like shot, not fear'd till felt, our sailes assaile;              30
  And what at first was call'd a gust, the same
  Hath now a stormes, anon a tempests name.
  _Ionas_, I pitty thee, and curse those men,
  Who when the storm rag'd most, did wake thee then;
  Sleepe is paines easiest salue, and doth fullfill                 35
  All offices of death, except to kill.
  But when I wakt, I saw, that I saw not;
  I, and the Sunne, which should teach mee'had forgot
  East, West, Day, Night, and I could onely say,
  If'the world had lasted, now it had beene day.                    40
  Thousands our noyses were, yet wee'mongst all
  Could none by his right name, but thunder call:
  Lightning was all our light, and it rain'd more
  Then if the Sunne had drunke the sea before.
  Some coffin'd in their cabbins lye,'equally                       45
  Griev'd that they are not dead, and yet must dye;
  And as sin-burd'ned soules from graves will creepe,
  At the last day, some forth their cabbins peepe:
  And tremblingly'aske what newes, and doe heare so,
  Like jealous husbands, what they would not know.                  50
  Some sitting on the hatches, would seeme there,
  With hideous gazing to feare away feare.
  Then note they the ships sicknesses, the Mast
  Shak'd with this ague, and the Hold and Wast
  With a salt dropsie clog'd, and all our tacklings                 55
  Snapping, like too-high-stretched treble strings.
  And from our totterd sailes, ragges drop downe so,
  As from one hang'd in chaines, a yeare agoe.
  Even our Ordinance plac'd for our defence,
  Strive to breake loose, and scape away from thence.               60
  Pumping hath tir'd our men, and what's the gaine?
  Seas into seas throwne, we suck in againe;
  Hearing hath deaf'd our saylers; and if they
  Knew how to heare, there's none knowes what to say.
  Compar'd to these stormes, death is but a qualme,                 65
  Hell somewhat lightsome, and the'Bermuda calme.
  Darknesse, lights elder brother, his birth-right
  Claims o'r this world, and to heaven hath chas'd light.
  All things are one, and that one none can be,
  Since all formes, uniforme deformity                              70
  Doth cover, so that wee, except God say
  Another _Fiat_, shall have no more day.
  So violent, yet long these furies bee,
  That though thine absence sterve me,'I wish not thee.




THE CALME.


  Our storme is past, and that storms tyrannous rage,
  A stupid calme, but nothing it, doth swage.
  The fable is inverted, and farre more
  A blocke afflicts, now, then a storke before.
  Stormes chafe, and soone weare out themselves, or us;              5
  In calmes, Heaven laughs to see us languish thus.
  As steady'as I can wish, that my thoughts were,
  Smooth as thy mistresse glasse, or what shines there,
  The sea is now. And, as the Iles which wee
  Seeke, when wee can move, our ships rooted bee.                   10
  As water did in stormes, now pitch runs out:
  As lead, when a fir'd Church becomes one spout.
  And all our beauty, and our trimme, decayes,
  Like courts removing, or like ended playes.
  The fighting place now seamens ragges supply;                     15
  And all the tackling is a frippery.
  No use of lanthornes; and in one place lay
  Feathers and dust, to day and yesterday.
  Earths hollownesses, which the worlds lungs are,
  Have no more winde then the upper valt of aire.                   20
  We can nor lost friends, nor sought foes recover,
  But meteorlike, save that wee move not, hover.
  Onely the Calenture together drawes
  Deare friends, which meet dead in great fishes jawes:
  And on the hatches as on Altars lyes                              25
  Each one, his owne Priest, and owne Sacrifice.
  Who live, that miracle do multiply
  Where walkers in hot Ovens, doe not dye.
  If in despite of these, wee swimme, that hath
  No more refreshing, then our brimstone Bath,                      30
  But from the sea, into the ship we turne,
  Like parboyl'd wretches, on the coales to burne.
  Like _Bajazet_ encag'd, the shepheards scoffe,
  Or like slacke sinew'd _Sampson_, his haire off,
  Languish our ships. Now, as a Miriade                             35
  Of Ants, durst th'Emperours lov'd snake invade,
  The crawling Gallies, Sea-goales, finny chips,
  Might brave our Pinnaces, now bed-ridde ships.
  Whether a rotten state, and hope of gaine,
  Or to disuse mee from the queasie paine                           40
  Of being belov'd, and loving, or the thirst
  Of honour, or faire death, out pusht mee first,
  I lose my end: for here as well as I
  A desperate may live, and a coward die.
  Stagge, dogge, and all which from, or towards flies,              45
  Is paid with life, or pray, or doing dyes.
  Fate grudges us all, and doth subtly lay
  A scourge,'gainst which wee all forget to pray,
  He that at sea prayes for more winde, as well
  Under the poles may begge cold, heat in hell.                     50
  What are wee then? How little more alas
  Is man now, then before he was? he was
  Nothing; for us, wee are for nothing fit;
  Chance, or our selves still disproportion it.
  Wee have no power, no will, no sense; I lye,                      55
  I should not then thus feele this miserie.



To S^r _Henry Wotton_.


  Sir, more then kisses, letters mingle Soules;
  For, thus friends absent speake. This ease controules
  The tediousnesse of my life: But for these
  I could ideate nothing, which could please,
  But I should wither in one day, and passe                          5
  To'a bottle'of Hay, that am a locke of Grasse.
  Life is a voyage, and in our lifes wayes
  Countries, Courts, Towns are Rockes, or Remoraes;
  They breake or stop all ships, yet our state's such,
  That though then pitch they staine worse, wee must touch.         10
  If in the furnace of the even line,
  Or under th'adverse icy poles thou pine,
  Thou know'st two temperate Regions girded in,
  Dwell there: But Oh, what refuge canst thou winne
  Parch'd in the Court, and in the country frozen?                  15
  Shall cities, built of both extremes, be chosen?
  Can dung and garlike be'a perfume? or can
  A Scorpion and Torpedo cure a man?
  Cities are worst of all three; of all three
  (O knottie riddle) each is worst equally.                         20
  Cities are Sepulchers; they who dwell there
  Are carcases, as if no such there were.
  And Courts are Theaters, where some men play
  Princes, some slaves, all to one end, and of one clay.
  The Country is a desert, where no good,                           25
  Gain'd (as habits, not borne,) is understood.
  There men become beasts, and prone to more evils;
  In cities blockes, and in a lewd court, devills.
  As in the first Chaos confusedly
  Each elements qualities were in the'other three;                  30
  So pride, lust, covetize, being feverall
  To these three places, yet all are in all,
  And mingled thus, their issue incestuous.
  Falshood is denizon'd. Virtue is barbarous.
  Let no man say there, Virtues flintie wall                        35
  Shall locke vice in mee, I'll do none, but know all.
  Men are spunges, which to poure out, receive,
  Who know false play, rather then lose, deceive.
  For in best understandings, sinne beganne,
  Angels sinn'd first, then Devills, and then man.                  40
  Onely perchance beast sinne not; wretched wee
  Are beasts in all, but white integritie.
  I thinke if men, which in these places live
  Durst looke for themselves, and themselves retrive,
  They would like strangers greet themselves, seeing than           45
  Utopian youth, growne old Italian.
    Be thou thine owne home, and in thy selfe dwell;
  Inne any where, continuance maketh hell.
  And seeing the snaile, which every where doth rome,
  Carrying his owne house still, still is at home,                  50
  Follow (for he is easie pac'd) this snaile,
  Bee thine owne Palace, or the world's thy gaile.
  And in the worlds sea, do not like corke sleepe
  Upon the waters face; nor in the deepe
  Sinke like a lead without a line: but as                          55
  Fishes glide, leaving no print where they passe,
  Nor making sound; so closely thy course goe,
  let men dispute, whether thou breathe, or no.
  Onely'in this one thing, be no Galenist: To make
  Courts hot ambitions wholesome, do not take                       60
  A dramme of Countries dulnesse; do not adde
  Correctives, but as chymiques, purge the bad.
  But, Sir, I advise not you, I rather doe
  Say o'er those lessons, which I learn'd of you:
  Whom, free from German schismes, and lightness                    65
  Of France, and faire Italies faithlesnesse,
  Having from these suck'd all they had of worth,
  And brought home that faith, which you carried forth,
  I throughly love. But if my selfe, I'have wonne
  To know my rules, I have, and you have                            70
                                         DONNE:



To S^r _Henry Goodyere_.


  Who makes the Past, a patterne for next yeare,
    Turnes no new leafe, but still the same things reads,
  Seene things, he sees againe, heard things doth heare,
    And makes his life, but like a paire of beads.

  A Palace, when'tis that, which it should be,                       5
    Leaves growing, and stands such, or else decayes:
  But hee which dwels there, is not so; for hee
    Strives to urge upward, and his fortune raise;

  So had your body'her morning, hath her noone,
    And shall not better; her next change is night:                 10
  But her faire larger guest, to'whom Sun and Moone
    Are sparkes, and short liv'd, claimes another right.

  The noble Soule by age growes lustier,
    Her appetite, and her digestion mend,
  Wee must not sterve, nor hope to pamper her                       15
    With womens milke, and pappe unto the end.

  Provide you manlyer dyet; you have seene
    All libraries, which are Schools, Camps, and Courts;
  But aske your Garners if you have not beene
    In harvests, too indulgent to your sports.                      20

  Would you redeeme it? then your selfe transplant
    A while from hence. Perchance outlandish ground
  Beares no more wit, then ours, but yet more scant
    Are those diversions there, which here abound.

  To be a stranger hath that benefit,                               25
    Wee can beginnings, but not habits choke.
  Goe; whither? Hence; you get, if you forget;
    New faults, till they prescribe in us, are smoake.

  Our soule, whose country'is heaven, and God her father,
    Into this world, corruptions sinke, is sent,                    30
  Yet, so much in her travaile she doth gather,
    That she returnes home, wiser then she went;

  It payes you well, if it teach you to spare,
    And make you,'ashm'd, to make your hawks praise, yours,
  Which when herselfe she lessens in the aire,                      35
    You then first say, that high enough she toures.

  However, keepe the lively tast you hold
    Of God, love him as now, but feare him more,
  And in your afternoones thinke what you told
    And promis'd him, at morning prayer before.                     40

  Let falshood like a discord anger you,
    Else be not froward. But why doe I touch
  Things, of which none is in your practise new,
    And Tables, or fruit-trenchers teach as much;

  But thus I make you keepe your promise Sir,                       45
    Riding I had you, though you still staid there,
  And in these thoughts, although you never stirre,
    You came with mee to Micham, and are here.



To M^r _Rowland Woodward_.


  Like one who'in her third widdowhood doth professe
  Her selfe a Nunne, tyed to retirednesse,
  So'affects my muse now, a chast fallownesse;

  Since shee to few, yet to too many'hath showne
  How love-song weeds, and Satyrique thornes are growne              5
  Where seeds of better Arts, were early sown.

  Though to use, and love Poëtrie, to mee,
  Betroth'd to no'one Art, be no'adulterie;
  Omissions of good, ill, as ill deeds bee.

  For though to us it seeme,'and be light and thinne,               10
  Yet in those faithfull scales, where God throwes in
  Mens workes, vanity weighs as much as sinne.

  If our Soules have stain'd their first white, yet wee
  May cloth them with faith, and deare honestie,
  Which God imputes, as native puritie.                             15

  There is no Vertue, but Religion:
  Wise, valiant, sober, just, are names, which none
  Want, which want not Vice-covering discretion.

  Seeke wee then our selves in our selves; for as
  Men force the Sunne with much more force to passe,                20
  By gathering his beames with a christall glasse;

  So wee, If wee into our selves will turne,
  Blowing our sparkes of vertue, may outburne
  The straw, which doth about our hearts sojourne.

  You know, Physitians, when they would infuse                      25
  Into any'oyle, the Soules of Simples, use
  Places, where they may lie still warme, to chuse.

  So workes retirednesse in us; To rome
  Giddily, and be every where, but at home,
  Such freedome doth a banishment become.                           30

  Wee are but farmers of our selves, yet may,
  If we can stocke our selves, and thrive, uplay
  Much, much deare treasure for the great rent day.

  Manure thy selfe then, to thy selfe be'approv'd,
  And with vaine outward things be no more mov'd,                   35
  But to know, that I love thee'and would be lov'd.






To S^r _Henry Wootton_.


  Here's no more newes, then vertue,'I may as well
  Tell you _Cales_, or S^t _Michaels_ tale for newes, as tell
  That vice doth here habitually dwell.

  Yet, as to'get stomachs, we walke up and downe,
  And toyle to sweeten rest, so, may God frowne,                     5
  If, but to loth both, I haunt Court, or Towne.

  For here no one is from the'extremitie
  Of vice, by any other reason free,
  But that the next to'him, still, is worse then hee.

  In this worlds warfare, they whom rugged Fate,                    10
  (Gods Commissary,) doth so throughly hate,
  As in'the Courts Squadron to marshall their state:

  If they stand arm'd with seely honesty,
  With wishing prayers, and neat integritie,
  Like Indians'gainst Spanish hosts they bee.                       15

  Suspitious boldnesse to this place belongs,
  And to'have as many eares as all have tongues;
  Tender to know, tough to acknowledge wrongs.

  Beleeve mee Sir, in my youths giddiest dayes,
  When to be like the Court, was a playes praise,                   20
  Playes were not so like Courts, as Courts'are like playes.

  Then let us at these mimicke antiques jeast,
  Whose deepest projects, and egregious gests
  Are but dull Moralls of a game at Chests.

  But now'tis incongruity to smile,                                 25
  Therefore I end; and bid farewell a while,
  _At Court_; though _From Court_, were the better stile.



_H: W: in Hiber: belligeranti._


  Went you to conquer? and have so much lost
  Yourself, that what in you was best and most,
  Respective friendship, should so quickly dye?
  In publique gaine my share'is not such that I
  Would lose your love for Ireland: better cheap                     5
  I pardon death (who though he do not reap
  Yet gleanes hee many of our frends away)
  Then that your waking mind should bee a prey
  To lethargies. Lett shott, and boggs, and skeines
  With bodies deale, as fate bids and restreynes;                   10
  Ere sicknesses attack, yong death is best,
  Who payes before his death doth scape arrest.
  Lett not your soule (at first with graces fill'd,
  And since, and thorough crooked lymbecks, still'd
  In many schools and courts, which quicken it,)                    15
  It self unto the Irish negligence submit.
  I aske not labored letters which should weare
  Long papers out: nor letters which should feare
  Dishonest carriage: or a seers art:
  Nor such as from the brayne come, but the hart.                   20




_To the Countesse of Bedford._


MADAME,

  Reason is our Soules left hand, Faith her right,
  By these wee reach divinity, that's you;
  Their loves, who have the blessings of your light,
  Grew from their reason, mine from faire faith grew.

  But as, although a squint lefthandednesse                          5
  Be'ungracious, yet we cannot want that hand,
  So would I, not to encrease, but to expresse
  My faith, as I beleeve, so understand.

  Therefore I study you first in your Saints,
  Those friends, whom your election glorifies,                      10
  Then in your deeds, accesses, and restraints,
  And what you reade, and what your selfe devize.

  But soone, the reasons why you'are lov'd by all,
  Grow infinite, and so passe reasons reach,
  Then backe againe to'implicite faith I fall,                      15
  And rest on what the Catholique voice doth teach;

  That you are good: and not one Heretique
  Denies it: if he did, yet you are so.
  For, rockes, which high top'd and deep rooted sticke,
  Waves wash, not undermine, nor overthrow.                         20

  In every thing there naturally growes
  A _Balsamum_ to keepe it fresh, and new,
  If'twere not injur'd by extrinsique blowes;
  Your birth and beauty are this Balme in you.

  But you of learning and religion,                                 25
  And vertue,'and such ingredients, have made
  A methridate, whose operation
  Keepes off, or cures what can be done or said.

  Yet, this is not your physicke, but your food,
  A dyet fit for you; for you are here                              30
  The first good Angell, since the worlds frame stood,
  That ever did in womans shape appeare.

  Since you are then Gods masterpeece, and so
  His Factor for our loves; do as you doe,
  Make your returne home gracious; and bestow                       35
  This life on that; so make one life of two.
    For so God helpe mee,'I would not misse you there
    For all the good which you can do me here.



_To the Countesse of Bedford._


MADAME,

  You have refin'd mee, and to worthyest things
  (Vertue, Art, Beauty, Fortune,) now I see
  Rarenesse, or use, not nature value brings;
  And such, as they are circumstanc'd, they bee.
    Two ills can ne're perplexe us, sinne to'excuse;                 5
    But of two good things, we may leave and chuse.

  Therefore at Court, which is not vertues clime,
  (Where a transcendent height, (as, lownesse mee)
  Makes her not be, or not show) all my rime
  Your vertues challenge, which there rarest bee;                   10
    For, as darke texts need notes: there some must bee
    To usher vertue, and say, _This is shee._

  So in the country'is beauty; to this place
  You are the season (Madame) you the day,
  'Tis but a grave of spices, till your face                        15
  Exhale them, and a thick close bud display.
    Widow'd and reclus'd else, her sweets she'enshrines;
    As China, when the Sunne at Brasill dines.

  Out from your chariot, morning breaks at night,
  And falsifies both computations so;                               20
  Since a new world doth rise here from your light,
  We your new creatures, by new recknings goe.
    This showes that you from nature lothly stray,
    That suffer not an artificiall day.

  In this you'have made the Court the Antipodes,                    25
  And will'd your Delegate, the vulgar Sunne,
  To doe profane autumnall offices,
  Whilst here to you, wee sacrificers runne;
    And whether Priests, or Organs, you wee'obey,
    We sound your influence, and your Dictates say.                 30

  Yet to that Deity which dwels in you,
  Your vertuous Soule, I now not sacrifice;
  These are _Petitions_ and not _Hymnes_; they sue
  But that I may survay the edifice.
    In all Religions as much care hath bin                          35
    Of Temples frames, and beauty,'as Rites within.

  As all which goe to Rome, doe not thereby
  Esteeme religions, and hold fast the best,
  But serve discourse, and curiosity,
  With that which doth religion but invest,                         40
    And shunne th'entangling laborinths of Schooles,
    And make it wit, to thinke the wiser fooles:

  So in this pilgrimage I would behold
  You as you'are vertues temple, not as shee,
  What walls of tender christall her enfold,                        45
  What eyes, hands, bosome, her pure Altars bee;
    And after this survay, oppose to all
    Bablers of Chappels, you th'Escuriall.

  Yet not as consecrate, but merely'as faire,
  On these I cast a lay and country eye.                            50
  Of past and future stories, which are rare,
  I finde you all record, and prophecie.
    Purge but the booke of Fate, that it admit
    No sad nor guilty legends, you are it.

  If good and lovely were not one, of both                          55
  You were the transcript, and originall,
  The Elements, the Parent, and the Growth,
  And every peece of you, is both their All:
    So'intire are all your deeds, and you, that you
    Must do the same thinge still; you cannot two.                  60

  But these (as nice thinne Schoole divinity
  Serves heresie to furder or represse)
  Tast of Poëtique rage, or flattery,
  And need not, where all hearts one truth professe;
    Oft from new proofes, and new phrase, new doubts grow,          65
    As strange attire aliens the men wee know.

  Leaving then busie praise, and all appeale
  To higher Courts, senses decree is true,
  The Mine, the Magazine, the Commonweale,
  The story of beauty,'in Twicknam is, and you.                     70
    Who hath seene one, would both; As, who had bin
    In Paradise, would seeke the Cherubin.



To S^r _Edward Herbert_. at _Iulyers_.


  Man is a lumpe, where all beasts kneaded bee,
    Wisdome makes him an Arke where all agree;
  The foole, in whom these beasts do live at jarre,
    Is sport to others, and a Theater;
  Nor scapes hee so, but is himselfe their prey,                     5
    All which was man in him, is eate away,
  And now his beasts on one another feed,
    Yet couple'in anger, and new monsters breed.
  How happy'is hee, which hath due place assign'd
    To'his beasts, and disaforested his minde!                      10
  Empail'd himselfe to keepe them out, not in;
    Can sow, and dares trust corne, where they have bin;
  Can use his horse, goate, wolfe, and every beast,
    And is not Asse himselfe to all the rest.
  Else, man not onely is the heard of swine,                        15
    But he's those devills too, which did incline
  Them to a headlong rage, and made them worse:
    For man can adde weight to heavens heaviest curse.
  As Soules (they say) by our first touch, take in
    The poysonous tincture of Originall sinne,                      20
  So, to the punishments which God doth fling,
    Our apprehension contributes the sting.
  To us, as to his chickins, he doth cast
    Hemlocke, and wee as men, his hemlocke taste;
  We do infuse to what he meant for meat,                           25
    Corrosivenesse, or intense cold or heat.
  For, God no such specifique poyson hath
    As kills we know not how; his fiercest wrath
  Hath no antipathy, but may be good
    At lest for physicke, if not for our food.                      30
  Thus man, that might be'his pleasure, is his rod,
    And is his devill, that might be his God.
  Since then our businesse is, to rectifie
    Nature, to what she was, wee'are led awry
  By them, who man to us in little show;                            35
    Greater then due, no forme we can bestow
  On him; for Man into himselfe can draw
    All; All his faith can swallow,'or reason chaw.
  All that is fill'd, and all that which doth fill,
    All the round world, to man is but a pill,                      40
  In all it workes not, but it is in all
    Poysonous, or purgative, or cordiall,
  For, knowledge kindles Calentures in some,
    And is to others icy _Opium_.
  As brave as true, is that profession than                         45
    Which you doe use to make; that you know man.
  This makes it credible; you have dwelt upon
    All worthy bookes, and now are such an one.
  Actions are authors, and of those in you
    Your friends finde every day a mart of new.                     50



_To the Countesse of Bedford._


  T'have written then, when you writ, seem'd to mee
    Worst of spirituall vices, Simony,
  And not t'have written then, seemes little lesse
    Then worst of civill vices, thanklessenesse.
  In this, my debt I seem'd loath to confesse,                       5
    In that, I seem'd to shunne beholdingnesse.
  But 'tis not soe; _nothings_, as I am, may
    Pay all they have, and yet have all to pay.
  Such borrow in their payments, and owe more
    By having leave to write so, then before.                       10
  Yet since rich mines in barren grounds are showne,
    May not I yeeld (not gold) but coale or stone?
  Temples were not demolish'd, though prophane:
    Here _Peter Ioves_, there _Paul_ hath _Dian's_ Fane.
  So whether my hymnes you admit or chuse,                          15
    In me you'have hallowed a Pagan Muse,
  And denizend a stranger, who mistaught
    By blamers of the times they mard, hath sought
  Vertues in corners, which now bravely doe
    Shine in the worlds best part, or all It; You.                  20
  I have beene told, that vertue in Courtiers hearts
    Suffers an Ostracisme, and departs.
  Profit, ease, fitnesse, plenty, bid it goe,
    But whither, only knowing you, I know;
  Your (or you) vertue two vast uses serves,                        25
    It ransomes one sex, and one Court preserves.
  There's nothing but your worth, which being true,
    Is knowne to any other, not to you:
  And you can never know it; To admit
    No knowledge of your worth, is some of it.                      30
  But since to you, your praises discords bee,
    Stoop, others ills to meditate with mee.
  Oh! to confesse wee know not what we should,
    Is halfe excuse; wee know not what we would:
  Lightnesse depresseth us, emptinesse fills,                       35
    We sweat and faint, yet still goe downe the hills.
  As new Philosophy arrests the Sunne,
    And bids the passive earth about it runne,
  So wee have dull'd our minde, it hath no ends;
    Onely the bodie's busie, and pretends;                          40
  As dead low earth ecclipses and controules
    The quick high Moone: so doth the body, Soules.
  In none but us, are such mixt engines found,
    As hands of double office: For, the ground
  We till with them; and them to heav'n wee raise;                  45
    Who prayer-lesse labours, or, without this, prayes,
  Doth but one halfe, that's none; He which said, _Plough
    And looke not back_, to looke up doth allow.
  Good seed degenerates, and oft obeyes
    The soyles disease, and into cockle strayes;                    50
  Let the minds thoughts be but transplanted so,
    Into the body,'and bastardly they grow.
  What hate could hurt our bodies like our love?
    Wee (but no forraine tyrants could) remove
  These not ingrav'd, but inborne dignities,                        55
    Caskets of soules; Temples, and Palaces:
  For, bodies shall from death redeemed bee,
    Soules but preserv'd, not naturally free.
  As men to'our prisons, new soules to us are sent,
    Which learne vice there, and come in innocent.                  60
  First seeds of every creature are in us,
    What ere the world hath bad, or pretious,
  Mans body can produce, hence hath it beene
    That stones, wormes, frogges, and snakes in man are seene:
  But who ere saw, though nature can worke soe,                     65
    That pearle, or gold, or corne in man did grow?
  We'have added to the world Virginia,'and sent
    Two new starres lately to the firmament;
  Why grudge wee us (not heaven) the dignity
    T'increase with ours, those faire soules company.               70
  But I must end this letter, though it doe
    Stand on two truths, neither is true to you,
  Vertue hath some perversenesse; For she will
    Neither beleeve her good, nor others ill.
  Even in you, vertues best paradise,                               75
    Vertue hath some, but wise degrees of vice.
  Too many vertues, or too much of one
    Begets in you unjust suspition;
  And ignorance of vice, makes vertue lesse,
    Quenching compassion of our wrechednesse.                       80
  But these are riddles; Some aspersion
    Of vice becomes well some complexion.
  Statesmen purge vice with vice, and may corrode
    The bad with bad, a spider with a toad:
  For so, ill thralls not them, but they tame ill                   85
    And make her do much good against her will,
  But in your Commonwealth, or world in you,
    Vice hath no office, or good worke to doe.
  Take then no vitious purge, but be content
    With cordiall vertue, your knowne nourishment.                  90




_To the Countesse of_ Bedford.

_On New-yeares day._


  This twilight of two yeares, not past nor next,
    Some embleme is of mee, or I of this,
  Who Meteor-like, of stuffe and forme perplext,
    Whose _what_, and _where_, in disputation is,
    If I should call mee _any thing_, should misse.                  5

  I summe the yeares, and mee, and finde mee not
    Debtor to th'old, nor Creditor to th'new,
  That cannot say, My thankes I have forgot,
    Nor trust I this with hopes, and yet scarce true
    This bravery is, since these times shew'd mee you.              10

  In recompence I would show future times
    What you were, and teach them to'urge towards such.
  Verse embalmes vertue;'and Tombs, or Thrones of rimes,
    Preserve fraile transitory fame, as much
    As spice doth bodies from corrupt aires touch.                  15

  Mine are short-liv'd; the tincture of your name
    Creates in them, but dissipates as fast,
  New spirits: for, strong agents with the same
    Force that doth warme and cherish, us doe wast;
    Kept hot with strong extracts, no bodies last:                  20

  So, my verse built of your just praise, might want
    Reason and likelihood, the firmest Base,
  And made of miracle, now faith is scant,
    Will vanish soone, and so possesse no place,
    And you, and it, too much grace might disgrace.                 25

  When all (as truth commands assent) confesse
    All truth of you, yet they will doubt how I,
  One corne of one low anthills dust, and lesse,
    Should name, know, or expresse a thing so high,
    And not an inch, measure infinity.                              30

  I cannot tell them, nor my selfe, nor you,
    But leave, lest truth b'endanger'd by my praise,
  And turne to God, who knowes I thinke this true,
    And useth oft, when such a heart mis-sayes,
    To make it good, for, such a praiser prayes.                    35

  Hee will best teach you, how you should lay out
    His stock of _beauty_, _learning_, _favour_, _blood_;
  He will perplex security with doubt,
    And cleare those doubts; hide from you,'and shew you good,
    And so increase your appetite and food;                         40

  Hee will teach you, that good and bad have not
    One latitude in cloysters, and in Court;
  Indifferent there the greatest space hath got;
    Some pitty'is not good there, some vaine disport,
    On this side sinne, with that place may comport.                45

  Yet he, as hee bounds seas, will fixe your houres,
    Which pleasure, and delight may not ingresse,
  And though what none else lost, be truliest yours,
    Hee will make you, what you did not, possesse,
    By using others, not vice, but weakenesse.                      50

  He will make you speake truths, and credibly,
    And make you doubt, that others doe not so:
  Hee will provide you keyes, and locks, to spie,
    And scape spies, to good ends, and hee will show
    What you may not acknowledge, what not know.                    55

  For your owne conscience, he gives innocence,
    But for your fame, a discreet warinesse,
  And though to scape, then to revenge offence
    Be better, he showes both, and to represse
    _Ioy_, when your state swells, _sadnesse_ when'tis lesse.       60

  From need of teares he will defend your soule,
    Or make a rebaptizing of one teare;
  Hee cannot, (that's, he will not) dis-inroule
    Your name; and when with active joy we heare
    This private Ghospell, then'tis our New Yeare.                  65



_To the Countesse of Huntingdon._


MADAME,

  Man to Gods image; _Eve_, to mans was made,
    Nor finde wee that God breath'd a soule in her,
  Canons will not Church functions you invade,
    Nor lawes to civill office you preferre.

  Who vagrant transitory Comets sees,                                5
    Wonders, because they'are rare; But a new starre
  Whose motion with the firmament agrees,
    Is miracle; for, there no new things are;

  In woman so perchance milde innocence
    A seldome comet is, but active good                             10
  A miracle, which reason scapes, and sense;
    For, Art and Nature this in them withstood.

  As such a starre, the _Magi_ led to view
    The manger-cradled infant, God below:
  By vertues beames by fame deriv'd from you,                       15
    May apt soules, and the worst may, vertue know.

  If the worlds age, and death be argued well
    By the Sunnes fall, which now towards earth doth bend,
  Then we might feare that vertue, since she fell
    So low as woman, should be neare her end.                       20

  But she's not stoop'd, but rais'd; exil'd by men
    She fled to heaven, that's heavenly things, that's you;
  She was in all men, thinly scatter'd then,
    But now amass'd, contracted in a few.

  She guilded us: But you are gold, and Shee;                       25
    Us she inform'd, but transubstantiates you;
  Soft dispositions which ductile bee,
    Elixarlike, she makes not cleane, but new.

  Though you a wifes and mothers name retaine,
    'Tis not as woman, for all are not soe,                         30
  But vertue having made you vertue,'is faine
    T'adhere in these names, her and you to show,

  Else, being alike pure, wee should neither see;
    As, water being into ayre rarify'd,
  Neither appeare, till in one cloud they bee,                      35
    So, for our sakes you do low names abide;

  Taught by great constellations, which being fram'd,
    Of the most starres, take low names, _Crab_ and _Bull_,
  When single planets by the _Gods_ are nam'd,
    You covet not great names, of great things full.                40

  So you, as woman, one doth comprehend,
    And in the vaile of kindred others see;
  To some ye are reveal'd, as in a friend,
    And as a vertuous Prince farre off, to mee.

  To whom, because from you all vertues flow,                       45
    And 'tis not none, to dare contemplate you,
  I, which doe so, as your true subject owe
    Some tribute for that, so these lines are due.

  If you can thinke these flatteries, they are,
    For then your judgement is below my praise,                     50
  If they were so, oft, flatteries worke as farre,
    As Counsels, and as farre th'endeavour raise.

  So my ill reaching you might there grow good,
    But I remaine a poyson'd fountaine still;
  But not your beauty, vertue, knowledge, blood                     55
    Are more above all flattery, then my will.

  And if I flatter any,'tis not you
    But my owne judgement, who did long agoe
  Pronounce, that all these praises should be true,
    And vertue should your beauty,'and birth outgrow.               60

  Now that my prophesies are all fulfill'd,
    Rather then God should not be honour'd too,
  And all these gifts confess'd, which hee instill'd,
    Your selfe were bound to say that which I doe.

  So I, but your Recorder am in this,                               65
    Or mouth, or Speaker of the universe,
  A ministeriall Notary, for'tis
    Not I, but you and fame, that make this verse;

  I was your Prophet in your yonger dayes,
  And now your Chaplaine, God in you to praise.                     70



To M^r _T. W._


  All haile sweet Poët, more full of more strong fire,
    Then hath or shall enkindle any spirit,
    I lov'd what nature gave thee, but this merit
  Of wit and Art I love not but admire;
  Who have before or shall write after thee,                         5
  Their workes, though toughly laboured, will bee
    Like infancie or age to mans firme stay,
    Or earely and late twilights to mid-day.

  Men say, and truly, that they better be
    Which be envyed then pittied: therefore I,                      10
    Because I wish thee best, doe thee envie:
  O wouldst thou, by like reason, pitty mee!
  But care not for mee: I, that ever was
  In Natures, and in Fortunes gifts, alas,
    (Before thy grace got in the Muses Schoole                      15
    A monster and a begger,) am now a foole.

  Oh how I grieve, that late borne modesty
    Hath got such root in easie waxen hearts,
    That men may not themselves, their owne good parts
  Extoll, without suspect of surquedrie,                            20
  For, but thy selfe, no subject can be found
  Worthy thy quill, nor any quill resound
    Thy worth but thine: how good it were to see
    A Poëm in thy praise, and writ by thee.

  Now if this song be too'harsh for rime, yet, as                   25
    The Painters bad god made a good devill,
    'Twill be good prose, although the verse be evill,
  If thou forget the rime as thou dost passe.
  Then write, that I may follow, and so bee
  Thy debter, thy'eccho, thy foyle, thy zanee.                      30
    I shall be thought, if mine like thine I shape,
    All the worlds Lyon, though I be thy Ape.


To M _T. W._


  Hast thee harsh verse, as fast as thy lame measure
    Will give thee leave, to him, my pain and pleasure.
  I have given thee, and yet thou art too weake,
    Feete, and a reasoning soule and tongue to speake.
  Plead for me, and so by thine and my labour                        5
    I am thy Creator, thou my Saviour.
  Tell him, all questions, which men have defended
    Both of the place and paines of hell, are ended;
  And 'tis decreed our hell is but privation
    Of him, at least in this earths habitation:                     10
  And 'tis where I am, where in every street
    Infections follow, overtake, and meete:
  Live I or die, by you my love is sent,
    And you'are my pawnes, or else my Testament.


To M^r _T. W._


  Pregnant again with th'old twins Hope, and Feare,
  Oft have I askt for thee, both how and where
  Thou wert, and what my hopes of letters were;

  As in our streets sly beggers narrowly
  Watch motions of the givers hand and eye,                          5
  And evermore conceive some hope thereby.

  And now thy Almes is given, thy letter'is read,
  The body risen againe, the which was dead,
  And thy poore starveling bountifully fed.

  After this banquet my Soule doth say grace,                       10
  And praise thee for'it, and zealously imbrace
  Thy love; though I thinke thy love in this case
    To be as gluttons, which say 'midst their meat,
    They love that best of which they most do eat.


To M^r _T. W._


  At once, from hence, my lines and I depart,
  I to my soft still walks, they to my Heart;
  I to the Nurse, they to the child of Art;

  Yet as a firme house, though the Carpenter
  Perish, doth stand: As an Embassadour                              5
  Lyes safe, how e'r his king be in danger:

  So, though I languish, prest with Melancholy,
  My verse, the strict Map of my misery,
  Shall live to see that, for whose want I dye.

  Therefore I envie them, and doe repent,                           10
  That from unhappy mee, things happy'are sent;
  Yet as a Picture, or bare Sacrament,
    Accept these lines, and if in them there be
    Merit of love, bestow that love on mee.



To M^r _R. W._


  Zealously my Muse doth salute all thee,
  Enquiring of that mistique trinitee
  Whereof thou,'and all to whom heavens do infuse
  Like fyer, are made; thy body, mind, and Muse.
  Dost thou recover sicknes, or prevent?                             5
  Or is thy Mind travail'd with discontent?
  Or art thou parted from the world and mee,
  In a good skorn of the worlds vanitee?
  Or is thy devout Muse retyr'd to sing
  Vpon her tender Elegiaque string?                                 10
  Our Minds part not, joyne then thy Muse with myne,
  For myne is barren thus devorc'd from thyne.




To M^r _R. W._


  Mvse not that by thy mind thy body is led:
  For by thy mind, my mind's distempered.
  So thy Care lives long, for I bearing part
  It eates not only thyne, but my swolne hart.
  And when it gives us intermission                                  5
  We take new harts for it to feede upon.
  But as a Lay Mans Genius doth controule
  Body and mind; the Muse beeing the Soules Soule
  Of Poets, that methinks should ease our anguish,
  Although our bodyes wither and minds languish.                    10
  Wright then, that my griefes which thine got may bee
  Cured by thy charming soveraigne melodee.






To M^r _C. B._


  Thy friend, whom thy deserts to thee enchaine,
    Urg'd by this unexcusable occasion,
    Thee and the Saint of his affection
  Leaving behinde, doth of both wants complaine;
  And let the love I beare to both sustaine                          5
    No blott nor maime by this division,
    Strong is this love which ties our hearts in one,
  And strong that love pursu'd with amorous paine;
  But though besides thy selfe I leave behind
    Heavens liberall, and earths thrice-fairer Sunne,               10
    Going to where sterne winter aye doth wonne,
  Yet, loves hot fires, which martyr my sad minde,
    Doe send forth scalding sighes, which have the Art
    To melt all Ice, but that which walls her heart.




To M^r _E. G._


  Even as lame things thirst their perfection, so
  The slimy rimes bred in our vale below,
  Bearing with them much of my love and hart,
  Fly unto that Parnassus, where thou art.
  There thou oreseest London: Here I have beene,                     5
  By staying in London, too much overseene.
  Now pleasures dearth our City doth posses,
  Our Theaters are fill'd with emptines;
  As lancke and thin is every street and way
  As a woman deliver'd yesterday.                                   10
  Nothing whereat to laugh my spleen espyes
  But bearbaitings or Law exercise.
  Therefore I'le leave it, and in the Country strive
  Pleasure, now fled from London, to retrive.
  Do thou so too: and fill not like a Bee                           15
  Thy thighs with hony, but as plenteously
  As Russian Marchants, thy selfes whole vessell load,
  And then at Winter retaile it here abroad.
  Blesse us with Suffolks sweets; and as it is
  Thy garden, make thy hive and warehouse this.                     20




To M^r _R. W._


  If, as mine is, thy life a slumber be,
    Seeme, when thou read'st these lines, to dreame of me,
  Never did Morpheus nor his brother weare
    Shapes soe like those Shapes, whom they would appeare,
  As this my letter is like me, for it                               5
    Hath my name, words, hand, feet, heart, minde and wit;
  It is my deed of gift of mee to thee,
    It is my Will, my selfe the Legacie.
  So thy retyrings I love, yea envie,
    Bred in thee by a wise melancholy,                              10
  That I rejoyce, that unto where thou art,
    Though I stay here, I can thus send my heart,
  As kindly'as any enamored Patient
    His Picture to his absent Love hath sent.

  All newes I thinke sooner reach thee then mee;                    15
    Havens are Heavens, and Ships wing'd Angels be,
  The which both Gospell, and sterne threatnings bring;
    Guyanaes harvest is nip'd in the spring,
  I feare; And with us (me thinkes) Fate deales so
    As with the Jewes guide God did; he did show                    20
  Him the rich land, but bar'd his entry in:
    Oh, slownes is our punishment and sinne.
  Perchance, these Spanish businesse being done,
    Which as the Earth betweene the Moone and Sun
  Eclipse the light which Guyana would give,                        25
    Our discontinued hopes we shall retrive:
  But if (as all th'All must) hopes smoake away,
    Is not Almightie Vertue'an India?

  If men be worlds, there is in every one
    Some thing to answere in some proportion                        30
  All the worlds riches: And in good men, this,
    Vertue, our formes forme and our soules soule, is.




To M^r _R. W._


  Kindly I envy thy songs perfection
    Built of all th'elements as our bodyes are:
    That Litle of earth that is in it, is a faire
  Delicious garden where all sweetes are sowne.
  In it is cherishing fyer which dryes in mee                        5
    Griefe which did drowne me: and halfe quench'd by it
    Are satirique fyres which urg'd me to have writt
  In skorne of all: for now I admyre thee.
    And as Ayre doth fullfill the hollownes
    Of rotten walls; so it myne emptines,                           10
  Where tost and mov'd it did beget this sound
  Which as a lame Eccho of thyne doth rebound.
    Oh, I was dead; but since thy song new Life did give,
    I recreated, even by thy creature, live.


To M^r _S. B._


  O Thou which to search out the secret parts
    Of the India, or rather Paradise
    Of knowledge, hast with courage and advise
  Lately launch'd into the vast Sea of Arts,
  Disdaine not in thy constant travailing                            5
    To doe as other Voyagers, and make
    Some turnes into lesse Creekes, and wisely take
  Fresh water at the Heliconian spring;
  I sing not, Siren like, to tempt; for I
    Am harsh; nor as those Scismatiques with you,                   10
    Which draw all wits of good hope to their crew;
  But seeing in you bright sparkes of Poetry,
    I, though I brought no fuell, had desire
    With these Articulate blasts to blow the fire.




To M^r _I. L._


  Of that short Roll of friends writ in my heart
    Which with thy name begins, since their depart,
  Whether in the English Provinces they be,
    Or drinke of Po, Sequan, or Danubie,
  There's none that sometimes greets us not, and yet                 5
    Your Trent is Lethe; that past, us you forget.
  You doe not duties of Societies,
    If from the'embrace of a lov'd wife you rise,
  View your fat Beasts, stretch'd Barnes, and labour'd fields,
    Eate, play, ryde, take all joyes which all day yeelds,          10
  And then againe to your embracements goe:
    Some houres on us your frends, and some bestow
  Upon your Muse, else both wee shall repent,
    I that my love, she that her guifts on you are spent.



To M^r _B. B._


  Is not thy sacred hunger of science
    Yet satisfy'd? Is not thy braines rich hive
    Fulfil'd with hony which thou dost derive
  From the Arts spirits and their Quintessence?
  Then weane thy selfe at last, and thee withdraw                    5
    From Cambridge thy old nurse, and, as the rest,
    Here toughly chew, and sturdily digest
  Th'immense vast volumes of our common law;
  And begin soone, lest my griefe grieve thee too,
    Which is, that that which I should have begun                   10
    In my youthes morning, now late must be done;
  And I as Giddy Travellers must doe,
    Which stray or sleepe all day, and having lost
    Light and strength, darke and tir'd must then ride post.

  If thou unto thy Muse be marryed,                                 15
    Embrace her ever, ever multiply,
    Be far from me that strange Adulterie
  To tempt thee and procure her widowhed.
  My Muse, (for I had one,) because I'am cold,
    Divorc'd her selfe: the cause being in me,                      20
    That I can take no new in Bigamye,
  Not my will only but power doth withhold.
  Hence comes it, that these Rymes which never had
    Mother, want matter, and they only have
    A little forme, the which their Father gave;                    25
  They are prophane, imperfect, oh, too bad
    To be counted Children of Poetry
    Except confirm'd and Bishoped by thee.




To M^r _I. L._


  Blest are your North parts, for all this long time
    My Sun is with you, cold and darke'is our Clime:
  Heavens Sun, which staid so long from us this yeare,
    Staid in your North (I thinke) for she was there,
  And hether by kinde nature drawne from thence,                     5
    Here rages, chafes, and threatens pestilence;
  Yet I, as long as shee from hence doth staie,
    Thinke this no South, no Sommer, nor no day.
  With thee my kinde and unkinde heart is run,
    There sacrifice it to that beauteous Sun:                       10
  And since thou art in Paradise and need'st crave
    No joyes addition, helpe thy friend to save.
  So may thy pastures with their flowery feasts,
    As suddenly as Lard, fat thy leane beasts;
  So may thy woods oft poll'd, yet ever weare                       15
    A greene, and when thee list, a golden haire;
  So may all thy sheepe bring forth Twins; and so
    In chace and race may thy horse all out goe;
  So may thy love and courage ne'r be cold;
    Thy Sonne ne'r Ward; Thy lov'd wife ne'r seem old;
  But maist thou wish great things, and them attaine,               21
    As thou telst her, and none but her, my paine.




To Sir _H. W._ at his going Ambassador to _Venice_.


  After those reverend papers, whose soule is
    Our good and great Kings lov'd hand and fear'd name,
  By which to you he derives much of his,
    And (how he may) makes you almost the same,

  A Taper of his Torch, a copie writ                                 5
    From his Originall, and a faire beame
  Of the same warme, and dazeling Sun, though it
    Must in another Sphere his vertue streame:

  After those learned papers which your hand
    Hath stor'd with notes of use and pleasure too,                 10
  From which rich treasury you may command
    Fit matter whether you will write or doe:

  After those loving papers, where friends tend
    With glad griefe, to your Sea-ward steps, farewel,
  Which thicken on you now, as prayers ascend                       15
    To heaven in troupes at'a good mans passing bell:

  Admit this honest paper, and allow
    It such an audience as your selfe would aske;
  What you must say at Venice this meanes now,
    And hath for nature, what you have for taske:                   20

  To sweare much love, not to be chang'd before
    Honour alone will to your fortune fit;
  Nor shall I then honour your forture, more
    Then I have done your honour wanting it.

  But'tis an easier load (though both oppresse)                     25
    To want, then governe greatnesse, for wee are
  In that, our owne and onely business,
    In this, wee must for others vices care;

  'Tis therefore well your spirits now are plac'd
    In their last Furnace, in activity;                             30
  Which fits them (Schooles and Courts and Warres o'rpast)
    To touch and test in any best degree.

  For mee, (if there be such a thing as I)
    Fortune (if there be such a thing as thee)
  Spies that I beare so well her tyranny,                           35
    That she thinks nothing else so fit for mee;

  But though she part us, to heare my oft prayers
    For your increase, God is as neere mee here;
  And to send you what I shall begge, his staires
    In length and ease are alike every where.                       40


To M^rs _M. H._


  Mad paper stay, and grudge not here to burne
    With all those sonnes whom my braine did create,
  At lest lye hid with mee, till thou returne
    To rags againe, which is thy native state.

  What though thou have enough unworthinesse                         5
    To come unto great place as others doe,
  That's much; emboldens, pulls, thrusts I confesse,
    But'tis not all; Thou should'st be wicked too.

  And, that thou canst not learne, or not of mee;
    Yet thou wilt goe? Goe, since thou goest to her                 10
  Who lacks but faults to be a Prince, for shee,
    Truth, whom they dare not pardon, dares preferre.

  But when thou com'st to that perplexing eye
    Which equally claimes _love_ and _reverence_,
  Thou wilt not long dispute it, thou wilt die;                     15
    And, having little now, have then no sense.

  Yet when her warme redeeming hand, which is
    A miracle; and made such to worke more,
  Doth touch thee (saples leafe) thou grow'st by this
    Her creature; glorify'd more then before.                       20

  Then as a mother which delights to heare
    Her early child mis-speake halfe uttered words,
  Or, because majesty doth never feare
    Ill or bold speech, she Audience affords.

  And then, cold speechlesse wretch, thou diest againe,             25
    And wisely; what discourse is left for thee?
  For, speech of ill, and her, thou must abstaine,
    And is there any good which is not shee?

  Yet maist thou praise her servants, though not her,
    And wit, and vertue,'and honour her attend,                     30
  And since they'are but her cloathes, thou shalt not erre,
    If thou her shape and beauty'and grace commend.

  Who knowes thy destiny? when thou hast done,
    Perchance her Cabinet may harbour thee,
  Whither all noble ambitious wits doe runne,                       35
    A nest almost as full of Good as shee.

  When thou art there, if any, whom wee know,
    Were sav'd before, and did that heaven partake,
  When she revolves his papers, marke what show
    Of favour, she alone, to them doth make.                        40

  Marke, if to get them, she o'r skip the rest,
    Marke, if shee read them twice, or kisse the name;
  Marke, if she doe the same that they protest,
    Marke, if she marke whether her woman came.

  Marke, if slight things be'objected, and o'r blowne,              45
    Marke, if her oathes against him be not still
  Reserv'd, and that shee grieves she's not her owne,
    And chides the doctrine that denies Freewill.

  I bid thee not doe this to be my spie;
    Nor to make my selfe her familiar;                              50
  But so much I doe love her choyce, that I
    Would faine love him that shall be lov'd of her.






_To the Countesse of Bedford._


  Honour is so sublime perfection,
  And so refinde; that when God was alone
  And creaturelesse at first, himselfe had none;

  But as of the elements, these which wee tread,
  Produce all things with which wee'are joy'd or fed,                5
  And, those are barren both above our head:

  So from low persons doth all honour flow;
  Kings, whom they would have honoured, to us show,
  And but _direct_ our honour, not _bestow_.

  For when from herbs the pure part must be wonne                   10
  From grosse, by Stilling, this is better done
  By despis'd dung, then by the fire or Sunne.

  Care not then, Madame,'how low your praysers lye;
  In labourers balads oft more piety
  God findes, then in _Te Deums_ melodie.                           15

  And, ordinance rais'd on Towers, so many mile
  Send not their voice, nor last so long a while
  As fires from th'earths low vaults in _Sicil_ Isle.

  Should I say I liv'd darker then were true,
  Your radiation can all clouds subdue;                             20
  But one,'tis best light to contemplate you.

  You, for whose body God made better clay,
  Or tooke Soules stuffe such as shall late decay,
  Or such as needs small change at the last day.

  This, as an Amber drop enwraps a Bee,                             25
  Covering discovers your quicke Soule; that we
  May in your through-shine front your hearts thoughts see.

  You teach (though wee learne not) a thing unknowne
  To our late times, the use of specular stone,
  Through which all things within without were shown.               30

  Of such were Temples; so and of such you are;
  _Beeing_ and _seeming_ is your equall care,
  And _vertues_ whole _summe_ is but _know_ and _dare_.

  But as our Soules of growth and Soules of sense
  Have birthright of our reasons Soule, yet hence                   35
  They fly not from that, nor seeke presidence:

  Natures first lesson, so, discretion,
  Must not grudge zeale a place, nor yet keepe none,
  Not banish it selfe, nor religion.

  Discretion is a wisemans Soule, and so                            40
  Religion is a Christians, and you know
  How these are one; her _yea_, is not her _no_.

  Nor may we hope to sodder still and knit
  These two, and dare to breake them; nor must wit
  Be colleague to religion, but be it.                              45

  In those poor types of God (round circles) so
  Religions tipes the peeclesse centers flow,
  And are in all the lines which all wayes goe.

  If either ever wrought in you alone
  Or principally, then religion                                     50
  Wrought your ends, and your wayes discretion.

  Goe thither stil, goe the same way you went,
  Who so would change, do covet or repent;
  Neither can reach you, great and innocent.



_To the Countesse of_ Bedford.

_Begun in France but never perfected._


  Though I be _dead_, and buried, yet I have
    (Living in you,) Court enough in my grave,
  As oft as there I thinke my selfe to bee,
    So many resurrections waken mee.
  That thankfullnesse your favours have begot                        5
    In mee, embalmes mee, that I doe not rot.
  This season as 'tis Easter, as 'tis spring,
    Must both to growth and to confession bring
  My thoughts dispos'd unto your influence; so,
    These verses bud, so these confessions grow.                    10
  First I confesse I have to others lent
    Your flock, and over prodigally spent
  Your treasure, for since I had never knowne
    Vertue or beautie, but as they are growne
  In you, I should not thinke or say they shine,                    15
    (So as I have) in any other Mine.
  Next I confesse this my confession,
    For, 'tis some fault thus much to touch upon
  Your praise to you, where half rights seeme too much,
    And make your minds sincere complexion blush.                   20
  Next I confesse my'impenitence, for I
    Can scarce repent my first fault, since thereby
  Remote low Spirits, which shall ne'r read you,
    May in lesse lessons finde enough to doe,
  By studying copies, not Originals,                                25
           _Desunt cætera._


_A Letter to the Lady_ Carey, _and M^rs_ Essex Riche, _From_ Amyens.


MADAME,

  Here where by All All Saints invoked are,
  'Twere too much schisme to be singular,
  And 'gainst a practise generall to warre.

  Yet turning to Saincts, should my'humility
  To other Sainct then you directed bee,                             5
  That were to make my schisme, heresie.

  Nor would I be a Convertite so cold,
  As not to tell it; If this be too bold,
  Pardons are in this market cheaply sold.

  Where, because Faith is in too low degree,                        10
  I thought it some Apostleship in mee
  To speake things which by faith alone I see.

  That is, of you, who are a firmament
  Of virtues, where no one is growne, or spent,
  They'are your materials, not your ornament.                       15

  Others whom wee call vertuous, are not so
  In their whole substance, but, their vertues grow
  But in their humours, and at seasons show.

  For when through tastlesse flat humilitie
  In dow bak'd men some harmelessenes we see,                       20
  'Tis but his _flegme_ that's _Vertuous_, and not Hee:

  Soe is the Blood sometimes; who ever ran
  To danger unimportun'd, he was than
  No better then a _sanguine_ Vertuous man.

  So cloysterall men, who, in pretence of feare                     25
  All contributions to this life forbeare,
  Have Vertue in _Melancholy_, and only there.

  Spirituall _Cholerique_ Crytiques, which in all
  Religions find faults, and forgive no fall,
  Have, through this zeale, Vertue but in their Gall.               30

  We'are thus but parcel guilt; to Gold we'are growne
  When Vertue is our Soules complexion;
  Who knowes his Vertues name or place, hath none.

  Vertue'is but aguish, when 'tis severall,
  By occasion wak'd, and circumstantiall.                           35
  True vertue is _Soule_, Alwaies in all deeds _All_.

  This Vertue thinking to give dignitie
  To your soule, found there no infirmitie,
  For, your soule was as good Vertue, as shee;

  Shee therefore wrought upon that part of you                      40
  Which is scarce lesse then soule, as she could do,
  And so hath made your beauty, Vertue too.

  Hence comes it, that your Beauty wounds not hearts,
  As Others, with prophane and sensuall Darts,
  But as an influence, vertuous thoughts imparts.                   45

  But if such friends by the honor of your sight
  Grow capable of this so great a light,
  As to partake your vertues, and their might,

  What must I thinke that influence must doe,
  Where it findes sympathie and matter too,                         50
  Vertue, and beauty of the same stuffe, as you?

  Which is, your noble worthie sister, shee
  Of whom, if what in this my Extasie
  And revelation of you both I see,

  I should write here, as in short Galleries                        55
  The Master at the end large glasses ties,
  So to present the roome twice to our eyes,

  So I should give this letter length, and say
  That which I said of you; there is no way
  From either, but by the other, not to stray.                      60

  May therefore this be enough to testifie
  My true devotion, free from flattery;
  He that beleeves himselfe, doth never lie.



_To the Countesse of Salisbury._ August. 1614.


  Faire, great, and good, since seeing you, wee see
  What Heaven can doe, and what any Earth can be:
  Since now your beauty shines, now when the Sunne
  Growne stale, is to so low a value runne,
  That his disshevel'd beames and scattered fires                    5
  Serve but for Ladies Periwigs and Tyres
  In lovers Sonnets: you come to repaire
  Gods booke of creatures, teaching what is faire.
  Since now, when all is withered, shrunke, and dri'd,
  All Vertues ebb'd out to a dead low tyde,                         10
  All the worlds frame being crumbled into sand,
  Where every man thinks by himselfe to stand,
  Integritie, friendship, and confidence,
  (Ciments of greatnes) being vapor'd hence,
  And narrow man being fill'd with little shares,                   15
  Court, Citie, Church, are all shops of small-wares,
  All having blowne to sparkes their noble fire,
  And drawne their sound gold-ingot into wyre;
  All trying by a love of littlenesse
  To make abridgments, and to draw to lesse,                        20
  Even that nothing, which at first we were;
  Since in these times, your greatnesse doth appeare,
  And that we learne by it, that man to get
  Towards him that's infinite, must first be great.
  Since in an age so ill, as none is fit                            25
  So much as to accuse, much lesse mend it,
  (For who can judge, or witnesse of those times
  Where all alike are guiltie of the crimes?)
  Where he that would be good, is thought by all
  A monster, or at best fantasticall;                               30
  Since now you durst be good, and that I doe
  Discerne, by daring to contemplate you,
  That there may be degrees of faire, great, good,
  Through your light, largenesse, vertue understood:
  If in this sacrifice of mine, be showne                           35
  Any small sparke of these, call it your owne.
  And if things like these, have been said by mee
  Of others; call not that Idolatrie.
  For had God made man first, and man had seene
  The third daies fruits, and flowers, and various greene,          40
  He might have said the best that he could say
  Of those faire creatures, which were made that day;
  And when next day he had admir'd the birth
  Of Sun, Moone, Stars, fairer then late-prais'd earth,
  Hee might have said the best that he could say,                   45
  And not be chid for praising yesterday;
  So though some things are not together true,
  As, that another is worthiest, and, that you:
  Yet, to say so, doth not condemne a man,
  If when he spoke them, they were both true than.                  50
  How faire a proofe of this, in our soule growes?
  Wee first have soules of growth, and sense, and those,
  When our last soule, our soule immortall came,
  Were swallowed into it, and have no name.
  Nor doth he injure those soules, which doth cast                  55
  The power and praise of both them, on the last;
  No more doe I wrong any; I adore
  The same things now, which I ador'd before,
  The subject chang'd, and measure; the same thing
  In a low constable, and in the King                               60
  I reverence; His power to work on mee:
  So did I humbly reverence each degree
  Of faire, great, good; but more, now I am come
  From having found their _walkes_, to find their _home_.
  And as I owe my first soules thankes, that they                   65
  For my last soule did fit and mould my clay,
  So am I debtor unto them, whose worth,
  Enabled me to profit, and take forth
  This new great lesson, thus to study you;
  Which none, not reading others, first, could doe.                 70
  Nor lacke I light to read this booke, though I
  In a darke Cave, yea in a Grave doe lie;
  For as your fellow Angells, so you doe
  Illustrate them who come to study you.
  The first whom we in Histories doe finde                          75
  To have profest all Arts, was one borne blinde:
  He lackt those eyes beasts have as well as wee,
  Not those, by which Angels are seene and see;
  So, though I'am borne without those eyes to live,
  Which fortune, who hath none her selfe, doth give,                80
  Which are, fit meanes to see bright courts and you,
  Yet may I see you thus, as now I doe;
  I shall by that, all goodnesse have discern'd,
  And though I burne my librarie, be learn'd.






_To the Lady Bedford._


  You that are she and you, that's double shee,
    In her dead face, halfe of your selfe shall see;
  Shee was the other part, for so they doe
    Which build them friendships, become one of two;
  So two, that but themselves no third can fit,                      5
    Which were to be so, when they were not yet;
  Twinnes, though their birth _Cusco_, and _Musco_ take,
    As divers starres one Constellation make;
  Pair'd like two eyes, have equall motion, so
    Both but one meanes to see, one way to goe.                     10
  Had you dy'd first, a carcasse shee had beene;
    And wee your rich Tombe in her face had seene;
  She like the Soule is gone, and you here stay,
    Not a live friend; but th'other halfe of clay.
  And since you act that part, As men say, here                     15
    Lies such a Prince, when but one part is there,
  And do all honour and devotion due
    Unto the whole, so wee all reverence you;
  For, such a friendship who would not adore
    In you, who are all what both were before,                      20
  Not all, as if some perished by this,
    But so, as all in you contracted is.
  As of this all, though many parts decay,
    The pure which elemented them shall stay;
  And though diffus'd, and spread in infinite,                      25
    Shall recollect, and in one All unite:
  So madame, as her Soule to heaven is fled,
    Her flesh rests in the earth, as in the bed;
  Her vertues do, as to their proper spheare,
    Returne to dwell with you, of whom they were:                   30
  As perfect motions are all circular,
    So they to you, their sea, whence lesse streames are.
  Shee was all spices, you all metalls; so
    In you two wee did both rich Indies know.
  And as no fire, nor rust can spend or waste                       35
    One dramme of gold, but what was first shall last,
  Though it bee forc'd in water, earth, salt, aire,
    Expans'd in infinite, none will impaire;
  So, to your selfe you may additions take,
    But nothing can you lesse, or changed make.                     40
  Seeke not in seeking new, to seeme to doubt,
    That you can match her, or not be without;
  But let some faithfull booke in her roome be,
    Yet but of _Iudith_ no such booke as shee.



AN ANATOMIE OF THE WORLD.

_Wherein_,

  By occasion of the untimely death of
  Mistris ELIZABETH DRVRY,
  the frailty and the decay of this
  whole World is represented.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first Anniversary.

       *       *       *       *       *


_To the praise of the dead_,

_and the_ ANATOMIE.


  Well dy'd the World, that we might live to see
  This world of wit, in his Anatomie:
  No evill wants his good; so wilder heires
  Bedew their Fathers Tombes, with forced teares,
  Whose state requites their losse: whiles thus we gain,             5
  Well may wee walke in blacks, but not complaine.
  Yet how can I consent the world is dead
  While this Muse lives? which in his spirits stead
  Seemes to informe a World; and bids it bee,
  In spight of losse or fraile mortalitie?                          10
  And thou the subject of this welborne thought,
  Thrice noble maid, couldst not have found nor sought
  A fitter time to yeeld to thy sad Fate,
  Then whiles this spirit lives, that can relate
  Thy worth so well to our last Nephews eyne,                       15
  That they shall wonder both at his and thine:
  Admired match! where strives in mutuall grace
  The cunning pencill, and the comely face:
  A taske which thy faire goodnesse made too much
  For the bold pride of vulgar pens to touch;                       20
  Enough is us to praise them that praise thee,
  And say, that but enough those prayses bee,
  Which hadst thou liv'd, had hid their fearfull head
  From th'angry checkings of thy modest red:
  Death barres reward and shame: when envy's gone,                  25
  And gaine, 'tis safe to give the dead their owne.
  As then the wise Egyptians wont to lay
  More on their Tombes, then houses: these of clay,
  But those of brasse, or marble were: so wee
  Give more unto thy Ghost, then unto thee.                         30
  Yet what wee give to thee, thou gav'st to us,
  And may'st but thanke thy selfe, for being thus:
  Yet what thou gav'st, and wert, O happy maid,
  Thy grace profest all due, where 'tis repayd.
  So these high songs that to thee suited bin                       35
  Serve but to sound thy Makers praise, in thine,
  Which thy deare soule as sweetly sings to him
  Amid the Quire of Saints, and Seraphim,
  As any Angels tongue can sing of thee;
  The subjects differ, though the skill agree:                      40
  For as by infant-yeares men judge of age,
  Thy early love, thy vertues, did presage
  What an high part thou bear'st in those best songs,
  Whereto no burden, nor no end belongs.
  Sing on thou virgin Soule, whose lossfull gaine                   45
  Thy lovesick parents have bewail'd in vaine;
  Never may thy Name be in our songs forgot,
  Till wee shall sing thy ditty and thy note.




An Anatomy of the World.

_The first Anniversary._


  When that rich Soule which to her heaven is gone,
  Whom all do celebrate, who know they have one,
  (For who is sure he hath a Soule, unlesse
  It see, and judge, and follow worthinesse,
  And by Deedes praise it? hee who doth not this,                    5
  May lodge an In-mate soule, but 'tis not his.)
  When that Queene ended here her progresse time,
  And, as t'her standing house to heaven did climbe,
  Where loath to make the Saints attend her long,
  She's now a part both of the Quire, and Song,                     10
  This World, in that great earthquake languished;
  For in a common bath of teares it bled,
  Which drew the strongest vitall spirits out:
  But succour'd then with a perplexed doubt,
  Whether the world did lose, or gaine in this,                     15
  (Because since now no other way there is,
  But goodnesse, to see her, whom all would see,
  All must endeavour to be good as shee,)
  This great consumption to a fever turn'd,
  And so the world had fits; it joy'd, it mourn'd;                  20
  And, as men thinke, that Agues physick are,
  And th'Ague being spent, give over care,
  So thou sicke World, mistak'st thy selfe to bee
  Well, when alas, thou'rt in a Lethargie.
  Her death did wound and tame thee than, and than                  25
  Thou might'st have better spar'd the Sunne, or Man.
  That wound was deep, but 'tis more misery,
  That thou hast lost thy sense and memory.
  'Twas heavy then to heare thy voyce of mone,
  But this is worse, that thou art speechlesse growne.              30
  Thou hast forgot thy name, thou hadst; thou wast
  Nothing but shee, and her thou hast o'rpast.
  For as a child kept from the Font, untill
  A prince, expected long, come to fulfill
  The ceremonies, thou unnam'd had'st laid,                         35
  Had not her comming, thee her Palace made:
  Her name defin'd thee, gave thee forme, and frame,
  And thou forgett'st to celebrate thy name.
  Some moneths she hath beene dead (but being dead,
  Measures of times are all determined)                             40
  But long she'ath beene away, long, long, yet none
  Offers to tell us who it is that's gone.
  But as in states doubtfull of future heires,
  When sicknesse without remedie empaires
  The present Prince, they're loth it should be said,               45
  The Prince doth languish, or the Prince is dead:
  So mankinde feeling now a generall thaw,
  A strong example gone, equall to law,
  The Cyment which did faithfully compact,
  And glue all vertues, now resolv'd, and slack'd,                  50
  Thought it some blasphemy to say sh'was dead,
  Or that our weaknesse was discovered
  In that confession; therefore spoke no more
  Then tongues, the Soule being gone, the losse deplore.
  But though it be too late to succour thee,                        55
  Sicke World, yea, dead, yea putrified, since shee
  Thy'intrinsique balme, and thy preservative,
  Can never be renew'd, thou never live,
  I (since no man can make thee live) will try,
  What wee may gaine by thy Anatomy.                                60
  Her death hath taught us dearely, that thou art
  Corrupt and mortall in thy purest part.
  Let no man say, the world it selfe being dead,
  'Tis labour lost to have discovered
  The worlds infirmities, since there is none                       65
  Alive to study this dissection;
  For there's a kinde of World remaining still,
  Though shee which did inanimate and fill
  The world, be gone, yet in this last long night,
  Her Ghost doth walke; that is, a glimmering light,                70
  A faint weake love of vertue, and of good,
  Reflects from her, on them which understood
  Her worth; and though she have shut in all day,
  The twilight of her memory doth stay;
  Which, from the carcasse of the old world, free,                  75
  Creates a new world, and new creatures bee
  Produc'd: the matter and the stuffe of this,
  Her vertue, and the forme our practice is:
  And though to be thus elemented, arme
  These creatures, from home-borne intrinsique harme,               80
  (For all assum'd unto this dignitie,
  So many weedlesse Paradises bee,
  Which of themselves produce no venemous sinne,
  Except some forraine Serpent bring it in)
  Yet, because outward stormes the strongest breake,                85
  And strength it selfe by confidence growes weake,
  This new world may be safer, being told
  The dangers and diseases of the old:
  For with due temper men doe then forgoe,
  Or covet things, when they their true worth know.                 90
  There is no health; Physitians say that wee,
  At best, enjoy but a neutralitie.
  And can there bee worse sicknesse, then to know
  That we are never well, nor can be so?
  Wee are borne ruinous: poore mothers cry,                         95
  That children come not right, nor orderly;
  Except they headlong come and fall upon
  An ominous precipitation.
  How witty's ruine! how importunate
  Upon mankinde! it labour'd to frustrate                          100
  Even Gods purpose; and made woman, sent
  For mans reliefe, cause of his languishment.
  They were to good ends, and they are so still,
  But accessory, and principall in ill;
  For that first marriage was our funerall:                        105
  One woman at one blow, then kill'd us all,
  And singly, one by one, they kill us now.
  We doe delightfully our selves allow
  To that consumption; and profusely blinde,
  Wee kill our selves to propagate our kinde.                      110
  And yet we do not that; we are not men:
  There is not now that mankinde, which was then,
  When as, the Sunne and man did seeme to strive,
  (Joynt tenants of the world) who should survive;
  When, Stagge, and Raven, and the long-liv'd tree,                115
  Compar'd with man, dy'd in minoritie;
  When, if a slow pac'd starre had stolne away
  From the observers marking, he might stay
  Two or three hundred yeares to see't againe,
  And then make up his observation plaine;                         120
  When, as the age was long, the sise was great;
  Mans growth confess'd, and recompenc'd the meat;
  So spacious and large, that every Soule
  Did a faire Kingdome, and large Realme controule:
  And when the very stature, thus erect,                           125
  Did that soule a good way towards heaven direct.
  Where is this mankinde now? who lives to age,
  Fit to be made _Methusalem_ his page?
  Alas, we scarce live long enough to try
  Whether a true made clocke run right, or lie.                    130
  Old Grandsires talke of yesterday with sorrow,
  And for our children wee reserve to morrow.
  So short is life, that every peasant strives,
  In a torne house, or field, to have three lives.
  And as in lasting, so in length is man                           135
  Contracted to an inch, who was a spanne;
  For had a man at first in forrests stray'd,
  Or shipwrack'd in the Sea, one would have laid
  A wager, that an Elephant, or Whale,
  That met him, would not hastily assaile                          140
  A thing so equall to him: now alas,
  The Fairies, and the Pigmies well may passe
  As credible; mankinde decayes so soone,
  We'are scarce our Fathers shadowes cast at noone:
  Onely death addes t'our length: nor are wee growne               145
  In stature to be men, till we are none.
  But this were light, did our lesse volume hold
  All the old Text; or had wee chang'd to gold
  Their silver; or dispos'd into lesse glasse
  Spirits of vertue, which then scatter'd was.                     150
  But 'tis not so: w'are not retir'd, but dampt;
  And as our bodies, so our mindes are crampt:
  'Tis shrinking, not close weaving that hath thus,
  In minde, and body both bedwarfed us.
  Wee seeme ambitious, Gods whole worke t'undoe;                   155
  Of nothing hee made us, and we strive too,
  To bring our selves to nothing backe; and wee
  Doe what wee can, to do't so soone as hee.
  With new diseases on our selves we warre,
  And with new Physicke, a worse Engin farre.                      160
  Thus man, this worlds Vice-Emperour, in whom
  All faculties, all graces are at home;
  And if in other creatures they appeare,
  They're but mans Ministers, and Legats there,
  To worke on their rebellions, and reduce                         165
  Them to Civility, and to mans use:
  This man, whom God did wooe, and loth t'attend
  Till man came up, did downe to man descend,
  This man, so great, that all that is, is his,
  Oh what a trifle, and poore thing he is!                         170
  If man were any thing, he's nothing now:
  Helpe, or at least some time to wast, allow
  T'his other wants, yet when he did depart
  With her whom we lament, hee lost his heart.
  She, of whom th'Ancients seem'd to prophesie,                    175
  When they call'd vertues by the name of _shee_;
  Shee in whom vertue was so much refin'd,
  That for Allay unto so pure a minde
  Shee tooke the weaker Sex; shee that could drive
  The poysonous tincture, and the staine of _Eve_,                 180
  Out of her thoughts, and deeds; and purifie
  All, by a true religious Alchymie;
  Shee, shee is dead; shee's dead: when thou knowest this,
  Thou knowest how poore a trifling thing man is.
  And learn'st thus much by our Anatomie,                          185
  The heart being perish'd, no part can be free.
  And that except thou feed (not banquet) on
  The supernaturall food, Religion,
  Thy better Growth growes withered, and scant;
  Be more then man, or thou'rt lesse then an Ant.                  190
  Then, as mankinde, so is the worlds whole frame
  Quite out of joynt, almost created lame:
  For, before God had made up all the rest,
  Corruption entred, and deprav'd the best:
  It seis'd the Angels, and then first of all                      195
  The world did in her cradle take a fall,
  And turn'd her braines, and tooke a generall maime,
  Wronging each joynt of th'universall frame.
  The noblest part, man, felt it first; and than
  Both beasts and plants, curst in the curse of man.               200
  So did the world from the first houre decay,
  That evening was beginning of the day,
  And now the Springs and Sommers which we see,
  Like sonnes of women after fiftie bee.
  And new Philosophy calls all in doubt,                           205
  The Element of fire is quite put out;
  The Sun is lost, and th'earth, and no mans wit
  Can well direct him where to looke for it.
  And freely men confesse that this world's spent,
  When in the Planets, and the Firmament                           210
  They seeke so many new; they see that this
  Is crumbled out againe to his Atomies.
  'Tis all in peeces, all cohaerence gone;
  All just supply, and all Relation:
  Prince, Subject, Father, Sonne, are things forgot,               215
  For every man alone thinkes he hath got
  To be a Phœnix, and that then can bee
  None of that kinde, of which he is, but hee.
  This is the worlds condition now, and now
  She that should all parts to reunion bow,                        220
  She that had all Magnetique force alone,
  To draw, and fasten sundred parts in one;
  She whom wise nature had invented then
  When she observ'd that every sort of men
  Did in their voyage in this worlds Sea stray,                    225
  And needed a new compasse for their way;
  She that was best, and first originall
  Of all faire copies, and the generall
  Steward to Fate; she whose rich eyes, and brest
  Guilt the West Indies, and perfum'd the East;                    230
  Whose having breath'd in this world, did bestow
  Spice on those Iles, and bad them still smell so,
  And that rich Indie which doth gold interre,
  Is but as single money, coyn'd from her:
  She to whom this world must it selfe refer,                      235
  As Suburbs, or the Microcosme of her,
  Shee, shee is dead; shee's dead: when thou knowst this,
  Thou knowst how lame a cripple this world is.
  And learn'st thus much by our Anatomy,
  That this worlds generall sickenesse doth not lie                240
  In any humour, or one certaine part;
  But as thou sawest it rotten at the heart,
  Thou seest a Hectique feaver hath got hold
  Of the whole substance, not to be contrould,
  And that thou hast but one way, not t'admit                      245
  The worlds infection, to be none of it.
  For the worlds subtilst immateriall parts
  Feele this consuming wound, and ages darts.
  For the worlds beauty is decai'd, or gone,
  Beauty, that's colour, and proportion.                           250
  We thinke the heavens enjoy their Sphericall,
  Their round proportion embracing all.
  But yet their various and perplexed course,
  Observ'd in divers ages, doth enforce
  Men to finde out so many Eccentrique parts,                      255
  Such divers downe-right lines, such overthwarts,
  As disproportion that pure forme: It teares
  The Firmament in eight and forty sheires,
  And in these Constellations then arise
  New starres, and old doe vanish from our eyes:                   260
  As though heav'n suffered earthquakes, peace or war,
  When new Towers rise, and old demolish't are.
  They have impal'd within a Zodiake
  The free-borne Sun, and keepe twelve Signes awake
  To watch his steps; the Goat and Crab controule,                 265
  And fright him backe, who else to either Pole
  (Did not these Tropiques fetter him) might runne:
  For his course is not round; nor can the Sunne
  Perfit a Circle, or maintaine his way
  One inch direct; but where he rose to-day                        270
  He comes no more, but with a couzening line,
  Steales by that point, and so is Serpentine:
  And seeming weary with his reeling thus,
  He meanes to sleepe, being now falne nearer us.
  So, of the Starres which boast that they doe runne               275
  In Circle still, none ends where he begun.
  All their proportion's lame, it sinkes, it swels.
  For of Meridians, and Parallels,
  Man hath weav'd out a net, and this net throwne
  Upon the Heavens, and now they are his owne.                     280
  Loth to goe up the hill, or labour thus
  To goe to heaven, we make heaven come to us.
  We spur, we reine the starres, and in their race
  They're diversly content t'obey our pace.
  But keepes the earth her round proportion still?                 285
  Doth not a Tenarif, or higher Hill
  Rise so high like a Rocke, that one might thinke
  The floating Moone would shipwracke there, and sinke?
  Seas are so deepe, that Whales being strooke to day,
  Perchance to morrow, scarse at middle way                        290
  Of their wish'd journies end, the bottome, die.
  And men, to sound depths, so much line untie,
  As one might justly thinke, that there would rise
  At end thereof, one of th'Antipodies:
  If under all, a Vault infernall bee,                             295
  (Which sure is spacious, except that we
  Invent another torment, that there must
  Millions into a straight hot roome be thrust)
  Then solidnesse, and roundnesse have no place.
  Are these but warts, and pock-holes in the face                  300
  Of th'earth? Thinke so: but yet confesse, in this
  The worlds proportion disfigured is;
  That those two legges whereon it doth rely,
  Reward and punishment are bent awry.
  And, Oh, it can no more be questioned,                           305
  That beauties best, proportion, is dead,
  Since even griefe it selfe, which now alone
  Is left us, is without proportion.
  Shee by whose lines proportion should bee
  Examin'd, measure of all Symmetree,                              310
  Whom had that Ancient seen, who thought soules made
  Of Harmony, he would at next have said
  That Harmony was shee, and thence infer,
  That soules were but Resultances from her,
  And did from her into our bodies goe,                            315
  As to our eyes, the formes from objects flow:
  Shee, who if those great Doctors truly said
  That the Arke to mans proportions was made,
  Had been a type for that, as that might be
  A type of her in this, that contrary                             320
  Both Elements, and Passions liv'd at peace
  In her, who caus'd all Civill war to cease.
  Shee, after whom, what forme so'er we see,
  Is discord, and rude incongruitie;
  Shee, shee is dead, shee's dead; when thou knowst this           325
  Thou knowst how ugly a monster this world is:
  And learn'st thus much by our Anatomie,
  That here is nothing to enamour thee:
  And that, not only faults in inward parts,
  Corruptions in our braines, or in our hearts,                    330
  Poysoning the fountaines, whence our actions spring,
  Endanger us: but that if every thing
  Be not done fitly'and in proportion,
  To satisfie wise, and good lookers on,
  (Since most men be such as most thinke they bee)                 335
  They're lothsome too, by this Deformitee.
  For good, and well, must in our actions meete;
  Wicked is not much worse than indiscreet.
  But beauties other second Element,
  Colour, and lustre now, is as neere spent.                       340
  And had the world his just proportion,
  Were it a ring still, yet the stone is gone.
  As a compassionate Turcoyse which doth tell
  By looking pale, the wearer is not well,
  As gold falls sicke being stung with Mercury,                    345
  All the worlds parts of such complexion bee.
  When nature was most busie, the first weeke,
  Swadling the new borne earth, God seem'd to like
  That she should sport her selfe sometimes, and play,
  To mingle, and vary colours every day:                           350
  And then, as though shee could not make inow,
  Himselfe his various Rainbow did allow.
  Sight is the noblest sense of any one,
  Yet sight hath only colour to feed on,
  And colour is decai'd: summers robe growes                       355
  Duskie, and like an oft dyed garment showes.
  Our blushing red, which us'd in cheekes to spred,
  Is inward sunke, and only our soules are red.
  Perchance the world might have recovered,
  If she whom we lament had not beene dead:                        360
  But shee, in whom all white, and red, and blew
  (Beauties ingredients) voluntary grew,
  As in an unvext Paradise; from whom
  Did all things verdure, and their lustre come,
  Whose composition was miraculous,                                365
  Being all colour, all Diaphanous,
  (For Ayre, and Fire but thick grosse bodies were,
  And liveliest stones but drowsie, and pale to her,)
  Shee, shee, is dead; shee's dead: when thou know'st this,
  Thou knowst how wan a Ghost this our world is:                   370
  And learn'st thus much by our Anatomie,
  That it should more affright, then pleasure thee.
  And that, since all faire colour then did sinke,
  'Tis now but wicked vanitie, to thinke
  To colour vicious deeds with good pretence,                      375
  Or with bought colors to illude mens sense.
  Nor in ought more this worlds decay appeares,
  Then that her influence the heav'n forbeares,
  Or that the Elements doe not feele this,
  The father, or the mother barren is.                             380
  The cloudes conceive not raine, or doe not powre,
  In the due birth time, downe the balmy showre;
  Th'Ayre doth not motherly sit on the earth,
  To hatch her seasons, and give all things birth;
  Spring-times were common cradles, but are tombes;                385
  And false-conceptions fill the generall wombes;
  Th'Ayre showes such Meteors, as none can see,
  Not only what they meane, but what they bee;
  Earth such new wormes, as would have troubled much
  Th'Ægyptian _Mages_ to have made more such.                      390
  What Artist now dares boast that he can bring
  Heaven hither, or constellate any thing,
  So as the influence of those starres may bee
  Imprison'd in an Hearbe, or Charme, or Tree,
  And doe by touch, all which those stars could doe?               395
  The art is lost, and correspondence too.
  For heaven gives little, and the earth takes lesse,
  And man least knowes their trade and purposes.
  If this commerce twixt heaven and earth were not
  Embarr'd, and all this traffique quite forgot,                   400
  She, for whose losse we have lamented thus,
  Would worke more fully, and pow'rfully on us:
  Since herbes, and roots, by dying lose not all,
  But they, yea Ashes too, are medicinall,
  Death could not quench her vertue so, but that                   405
  It would be (if not follow'd) wondred at:
  And all the world would be one dying Swan,
  To sing her funerall praise, and vanish than.
  But as some Serpents poyson hurteth not,
  Except it be from the live Serpent shot,                         410
  So doth her vertue need her here, to fit
  That unto us; shee working more then it.
  But shee, in whom to such maturity
  Vertue was growne, past growth, that it must die;
  She, from whose influence all Impressions came,                  415
  But, by Receivers impotencies, lame,
  Who, though she could not transubstantiate
  All states to gold, yet guilded every state,
  So that some Princes have some temperance;
  Some Counsellers some purpose to advance                         420
  The common profit; and some people have
  Some stay, no more then Kings should give, to crave;
  Some women have some taciturnity,
  Some nunneries some graines of chastitie.
  She that did thus much, and much more could doe,                 425
  But that our age was Iron, and rustie too,
  Shee, shee is dead; shee's dead; when thou knowst this,
  Thou knowst how drie a Cinder this world is.
  And learn'st thus much by our Anatomy,
  That 'tis in vaine to dew, or mollifie                           430
  It with thy teares, or sweat, or blood: nothing
  Is worth our travaile, griefe, or perishing,
  But those rich joyes, which did possesse her heart,
  Of which she's now partaker, and a part.
  But as in cutting up a man that's dead,                          435
  The body will not last out, to have read
  On every part, and therefore men direct
  Their speech to parts, that are of most effect;
  So the worlds carcasse would not last, if I
  Were punctuall in this Anatomy;                                  440
  Nor smels it well to hearers, if one tell
  Them their disease, who faine would think they're well.
  Here therefore be the end: And, blessed maid,
  Of whom is meant what ever hath been said,
  Or shall be spoken well by any tongue,                           445
  Whose name refines course lines, and makes prose song,
  Accept this tribute, and his first yeares rent,
  Who till his darke short tapers end be spent,
  As oft as thy feast sees this widowed earth,
  Will yearely celebrate thy second birth,                         450
  That is, thy death; for though the soule of man
  Be got when man is made, 'tis borne but than
  When man doth die; our body's as the wombe,
  And, as a Mid-wife, death directs it home.
  And you her creatures, whom she workes upon,                     455
  And have your last, and best concoction
  From her example, and her vertue, if you
  In reverence to her, do thinke it due,
  That no one should her praises thus rehearse,
  As matter fit for Chronicle, not verse;                          460
  Vouchsafe to call to minde that God did make
  A last, and lasting'st peece, a song. He spake
  To _Moses_ to deliver unto all,
  That song, because hee knew they would let fall
  The Law, the Prophets, and the History,                          465
  But keepe the song still in their memory:
  Such an opinion (in due measure) made
  Me this great Office boldly to invade:
  Nor could incomprehensiblenesse deterre
  Mee, from thus trying to emprison her,                           470
  Which when I saw that a strict grave could doe,
  I saw not why verse might not do so too.
  Verse hath a middle nature: heaven keepes Soules,
  The Grave keepes bodies, Verse the Fame enroules.



A Funerall ELEGIE.


  'Tis lost, to trust a Tombe with such a guest,
  Or to confine her in a marble chest.
  Alas, what's Marble, Jeat, or Porphyrie,
  Priz'd with the Chrysolite of either eye,
  Or with those Pearles, and Rubies, which she was?                  5
  Joyne the two Indies in one Tombe, 'tis glasse;
  And so is all to her materials,
  Though every inch were ten Escurials,
  Yet she's demolish'd: can wee keepe her then
  In works of hands, or of the wits of men?                         10
  Can these memorials, ragges of paper, give
  Life to that name, by which name they must live?
  Sickly, alas, short-liv'd, aborted bee
  Those carcasse verses, whose soule is not shee.
  And can shee, who no longer would be shee,                        15
  Being such a Tabernacle, stoop to be
  In paper wrapt; or, when shee would not lie
  In such a house, dwell in an Elegie?
  But 'tis no matter; wee may well allow
  Verse to live so long as the world will now,                      20
  For her death wounded it. The world containes
  Princes for armes, and Counsellors for braines,
  Lawyers for tongues, Divines for hearts, and more,
  The Rich for stomackes, and for backes, the Poore;
  The Officers for hands, Merchants for feet,                       25
  By which, remote and distant Countries meet.
  But those fine spirits which do tune, and set
  This Organ, are those peeces which beget
  Wonder and love; and these were shee; and shee
  Being spent, the world must needs decrepit bee;                   30
  For since death will proceed to triumph still,
  He can finde nothing, after her, to kill,
  Except the world it selfe, so great as shee.
  Thus brave and confident may Nature bee,
  Death cannot give her such another blow,                          35
  Because shee cannot such another show.
  But must wee say she's dead? may't not be said
  That as a sundred clocke is peecemeale laid,
  Not to be lost, but by the makers hand
  Repollish'd, without errour then to stand,                        40
  Or as the Affrique Niger streame enwombs
  It selfe into the earth, and after comes
  (Having first made a naturall bridge, to passe
  For many leagues) farre greater then it was,
  May't not be said, that her grave shall restore                   45
  Her, greater, purer, firmer, then before?
  Heaven may say this, and joy in't, but can wee
  Who live, and lacke her, here this vantage see?
  What is't to us, alas, if there have beene
  An Angell made a Throne, or Cherubin?                             50
  Wee lose by't: and as aged men are glad
  Being tastlesse growne, to joy in joyes they had,
  So now the sick starv'd world must feed upon
  This joy, that we had her, who now is gone.
  Rejoyce then Nature, and this World, that you,                    55
  Fearing the last fires hastning to subdue
  Your force and vigour, ere it were neere gone,
  Wisely bestow'd and laid it all on one.
  One, whose cleare body was so pure and thinne,
  Because it need disguise no thought within.                       60
  'Twas but a through-light scarfe, her minde t'inroule;
  Or exhalation breath'd out from her Soule.
  One, whom all men who durst no more, admir'd:
  And whom, who ere had worth enough, desir'd;
  As when a Temple's built, Saints emulate                          65
  To which of them, it shall be consecrate.
  But, as when heaven lookes on us with new eyes,
  Those new starres every Artist exercise,
  What place they should assigne to them they doubt,
  Argue,'and agree not, till those starres goe out:                 70
  So the world studied whose this peece should be,
  Till shee can be no bodies else, nor shee:
  But like a Lampe of Balsamum, desir'd
  Rather t'adorne, then last, she soone expir'd,
  Cloath'd in her virgin white integritie,                          75
  For marriage, though it doe not staine, doth dye.
  To scape th'infirmities which wait upon
  Woman, she went away, before sh'was one;
  And the worlds busie noyse to overcome,
  Tooke so much death, as serv'd for _opium_;                       80
  For though she could not, nor could chuse to dye,
  She'ath yeelded to too long an extasie:
  Hee which not knowing her said History,
  Should come to reade the booke of destiny,
  How faire, and chast, humble, and high she'ad been,               85
  Much promis'd, much perform'd, at not fifteene,
  And measuring future things, by things before,
  Should turne the leafe to reade, and reade no more,
  Would thinke that either destiny mistooke,
  Or that some leaves were torne out of the booke.                  90
  But 'tis not so; Fate did but usher her
  To yeares of reasons use, and then inferre
  Her destiny to her selfe, which liberty
  She tooke but for thus much, thus much to die.
  Her modestie not suffering her to bee                             95
  Fellow-Commissioner with Destinie,
  She did no more but die; if after her
  Any shall live, which dare true good prefer,
  Every such person is her deligate,
  T'accomplish that which should have beene her Fate.              100
  They shall make up that Booke and shall have thanks
  Of Fate, and her, for filling up their blankes.
  For future vertuous deeds are Legacies,
  Which from the gift of her example rise;
  And 'tis in heav'n part of spirituall mirth,                     105
  To see how well the good play her, on earth.




OF THE PROGRESSE OF THE SOULE.

_Wherein_,

  By occasion of the Religious death of
  Mistris ELIZABETH DRVRY,
  the incommodities of the Soule in
  this life, and her exaltation in
  the next, are contemplated.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second Anniversary.

       *       *       *       *       *


_The Harbinger to the_

PROGRESSE.


  Two Soules move here, and mine (a third) must move
  Paces of admiration, and of love;
  Thy Soule (deare virgin) whose this tribute is,
  Mov'd from this mortall Spheare to lively blisse;
  And yet moves still, and still aspires to see                      5
  The worlds last day, thy glories full degree:
  Like as those starres which thou o'r-lookest farre,
  Are in their place, and yet still moved are:
  No soule (whiles with the luggage of this clay
  It clogged is) can follow thee halfe way;                         10
  Or see thy flight, which doth our thoughts outgoe
  So fast, that now the lightning moves but slow:
  But now thou art as high in heaven flowne
  As heaven's from us; what soule besides thine owne
  Can tell thy joyes, or say he can relate                          15
  Thy glorious Journals in that blessed state?
  I envie thee (Rich soule) I envy thee,
  Although I cannot yet thy glory see:
  And thou (great spirit) which hers follow'd hast
  So fast, as none can follow thine so fast;                        20
  So far, as none can follow thine so farre,
  (And if this flesh did not the passage barre
  Hadst caught her) let me wonder at thy flight
  Which long agone hadst lost the vulgar sight,
  And now mak'st proud the better eyes, that they                   25
  Can see thee less'ned in thine ayery way;
  So while thou mak'st her soule by progresse knowne
  Thou mak'st a noble progresse of thine owne,
  From this worlds carkasse having mounted high
  To that pure life of immortalitie;                                30
  Since thine aspiring thoughts themselves so raise
  That more may not beseeme a creatures praise,
  Yet still thou vow'st her more; and every yeare
  Mak'st a new progresse, while thou wandrest here;
  Still upward mount; and let thy Makers praise                     35
  Honor thy Laura, and adorne thy laies.
  And since thy Muse her head in heaven shrouds,
  Oh let her never stoope below the clouds:
  And if those glorious sainted soules may know
  Or what wee doe, or what wee sing below,                          40
  Those acts, those songs shall still content them best
  Which praise those awfull Powers that make them blest.




OF THE PROGRESSE OF THE SOULE.

_The second Anniversarie._

  Nothing could make me sooner to confesse
  That this world had an everlastingnesse,
  Then to consider, that a yeare is runne,
  Since both this lower world's, and the Sunnes Sunne,
  The Lustre, and the vigor of this All,                             5
  Did set; 'twere blasphemie to say, did fall.
  But as a ship which hath strooke saile, doth runne
  By force of that force which before, it wonne:
  Or as sometimes in a beheaded man,
  Though at those two Red seas, which freely ranne,                 10
  One from the Trunke, another from the Head,
  His soule be sail'd, to her eternall bed,
  His eyes will twinckle, and his tongue will roll,
  As though he beckned, and cal'd backe his soule,
  He graspes his hands, and he pulls up his feet,                   15
  And seemes to reach, and to step forth to meet
  His soule; when all these motions which we saw,
  Are but as Ice, which crackles at a thaw:
  Or as a Lute, which in moist weather, rings
  Her knell alone, by cracking of her strings:                      20
  So struggles this dead world, now shee is gone;
  For there is motion in corruption.
  As some daies are at the Creation nam'd,
  Before the Sunne, the which fram'd daies, was fram'd,
  So after this Sunne's set, some shew appeares,                    25
  And orderly vicissitude of yeares.
  Yet a new Deluge, and of _Lethe_ flood,
  Hath drown'd us all, All have forgot all good,
  Forgetting her, the maine reserve of all.
  Yet in this deluge, grosse and generall,                          30
  Thou seest me strive for life; my life shall bee,
  To be hereafter prais'd, for praysing thee;
  Immortall Maid, who though thou would'st refuse
  The name of Mother, be unto my Muse
  A Father, since her chast Ambition is,                            35
  Yearely to bring forth such a child as this.
  These Hymnes may worke on future wits, and so
  May great Grand children of thy prayses grow.
  And so, though not revive, embalme and spice
  The world, which else would putrifie with vice.                   40
  For thus, Man may extend thy progeny,
  Untill man doe but vanish, and not die.
  These Hymnes thy issue, may encrease so long,
  As till Gods great _Venite_ change the song.
  Thirst for that time, O my insatiate soule,                       45
  And serve thy thirst, with Gods safe-sealing Bowle.
  Be thirstie still, and drinke still till thou goe
  To th'only Health, to be Hydroptique so.
  Forget this rotten world; And unto thee
  Let thine owne times as an old storie bee.                        50
  Be not concern'd: studie not why, nor when;
  Doe not so much as not beleeve a man.
  For though to erre, be worst, to try truths forth,
  Is far more businesse, then this world is worth.
  The world is but a carkasse; thou art fed                         55
  By it, but as a worme, that carkasse bred;
  And why should'st thou, poore worme, consider more,
  When this world will grow better then before,
  Then those thy fellow wormes doe thinke upon
  That carkasses last resurrection.                                 60
  Forget this world, and scarce thinke of it so,
  As of old clothes, cast off a yeare agoe.
  To be thus stupid is Alacritie;
  Men thus Lethargique have best Memory.
  Look upward; that's towards her, whose happy state                65
  We now lament not, but congratulate.
  Shee, to whom all this world was but a stage,
  Where all sat harkning how her youthfull age
  Should be emploi'd, because in all shee did,
  Some Figure of the Golden times was hid.                          70
  Who could not lacke, what e'r this world could give,
  Because shee was the forme, that made it live;
  Nor could complaine, that this world was unfit
  To be staid in, then when shee was in it;
  Shee that first tried indifferent desires                         75
  By vertue, and vertue by religious fires,
  Shee to whose person Paradise adher'd,
  As Courts to Princes, shee whose eyes ensphear'd
  Star-light enough, t'have made the South controule,
  (Had shee beene there) the Star-full Northerne Pole,              80
  Shee, shee is gone; she is gone; when thou knowest this,
  What fragmentary rubbidge this world is
  Thou knowest, and that it is not worth a thought;
  He honors it too much that thinkes it nought.
  Thinke then, my soule, that death is but a Groome,                85
  Which brings a Taper to the outward roome,
  Whence thou spiest first a little glimmering light,
  And after brings it nearer to thy sight:
  For such approaches doth heaven make in death.
  Thinke thy selfe labouring now with broken breath,                90
  And thinke those broken and soft Notes to bee
  Division, and thy happyest Harmonie.
  Thinke thee laid on thy death-bed, loose and slacke;
  And thinke that, but unbinding of a packe,
  To take one precious thing, thy soule from thence.                95
  Thinke thy selfe parch'd with fevers violence,
  Anger thine ague more, by calling it
  Thy Physicke; chide the slacknesse of the fit.
  Thinke that thou hear'st thy knell, and think no more,
  But that, as Bels cal'd thee to Church before,                   100
  So this, to the Triumphant Church, calls thee.
  Thinke Satans Sergeants round about thee bee,
  And thinke that but for Legacies they thrust;
  Give one thy Pride, to'another give thy Lust:
  Give them those sinnes which they gave thee before,              105
  And trust th'immaculate blood to wash thy score.
  Thinke thy friends weeping round, and thinke that they
  Weepe but because they goe not yet thy way.
  Thinke that they close thine eyes, and thinke in this,
  That they confesse much in the world, amisse,                    110
  Who dare not trust a dead mans eye with that,
  Which they from God, and Angels cover not.
  Thinke that they shroud thee up, and think from thence
  They reinvest thee in white innocence.
  Thinke that thy body rots, and (if so low,                       115
  Thy soule exalted so, thy thoughts can goe,)
  Think thee a Prince, who of themselves create
  Wormes which insensibly devoure their State.
  Thinke that they bury thee, and thinke that right
  Laies thee to sleepe but a Saint Lucies night.                   120
  Thinke these things cheerefully: and if thou bee
  Drowsie or slacke, remember then that shee,
  Shee whose Complexion was so even made,
  That which of her Ingredients should invade
  The other three, no Feare, no Art could guesse:                  125
  So far were all remov'd from more or lesse.
  But as in Mithridate, or just perfumes,
  Where all good things being met, no one presumes
  To governe, or to triumph on the rest,
  Only because all were, no part was best.                         130
  And as, though all doe know, that quantities
  Are made of lines, and lines from Points arise,
  None can these lines or quantities unjoynt,
  And say this is a line, or this a point,
  So though the Elements and Humors were                           135
  In her, one could not say, this governes there.
  Whose even constitution might have wonne
  Any disease to venter on the Sunne,
  Rather then her: and make a spirit feare,
  That hee to disuniting subject were.                             140
  To whose proportions if we would compare
  Cubes, th'are unstable; Circles, Angular;
  She who was such a chaine as Fate employes
  To bring mankinde all Fortunes it enjoyes;
  So fast, so even wrought, as one would thinke,                   145
  No Accident could threaten any linke;
  Shee, shee embrac'd a sicknesse, gave it meat,
  The purest blood, and breath, that e'r it eate;
  And hath taught us, that though a good man hath
  Title to heaven, and plead it by his Faith,                      150
  And though he may pretend a conquest, since
  Heaven was content to suffer violence,
  Yea though hee plead a long possession too,
  (For they're in heaven on earth who heavens workes do)
  Though hee had right and power and place, before,                155
  Yet Death must usher, and unlocke the doore.
  Thinke further on thy selfe, my Soule, and thinke
  How thou at first wast made but in a sinke;
  Thinke that it argued some infirmitie,
  That those two soules, which then thou foundst in me,            160
  Thou fedst upon, and drewst into thee, both
  My second soule of sense, and first of growth.
  Thinke but how poore thou wast, how obnoxious;
  Whom a small lumpe of flesh could poyson thus.
  This curded milke, this poore unlittered whelpe                  165
  My body, could, beyond escape or helpe,
  Infect thee with Originall sinne, and thou
  Couldst neither then refuse, nor leave it now.
  Thinke that no stubborne sullen Anchorit,
  Which fixt to a pillar, or a grave, doth sit                     170
  Bedded, and bath'd in all his ordures, dwels
  So fowly as our Soules in their first-built Cels.
  Thinke in how poore a prison thou didst lie
  After, enabled but to suck, and crie.
  Thinke, when'twas growne to most,'twas a poore Inne,             175
  A Province pack'd up in two yards of skinne,
  And that usurp'd or threatned with the rage
  Of sicknesses, or their true mother, Age.
  But thinke that Death hath now enfranchis'd thee,
  Thou hast thy'expansion now, and libertie;                       180
  Thinke that a rustie Peece, discharg'd, is flowne
  In peeces, and the bullet is his owne,
  And freely flies: This to thy Soule allow,
  Thinke thy shell broke, thinke thy Soule hatch'd but now.
  And think this slow-pac'd soule, which late did cleave           185
  To'a body, and went but by the bodies leave,
  Twenty, perchance, or thirty mile a day,
  Dispatches in a minute all the way
  Twixt heaven, and earth; she stayes not in the ayre,
  To looke what Meteors there themselves prepare;                  190
  She carries no desire to know, nor sense,
  Whether th'ayres middle region be intense;
  For th'Element of fire, she doth not know,
  Whether she past by such a place or no;
  She baits not at the Moone, nor cares to trie                    195
  Whether in that new world, men live, and die.
  _Venus_ retards her not, to'enquire, how shee
  Can, (being one starre) _Hesper_, and _Vesper_ bee;
  Hee that charm'd _Argus_ eyes, sweet _Mercury_,
  Workes not on her, who now is growne all eye;                    200
  Who, if she meet the body of the Sunne,
  Goes through, not staying till his course be runne;
  Who findes in _Mars_ his Campe no corps of Guard;
  Nor is by _Iove_, nor by his father barr'd;
  But ere she can consider how she went,                           205
  At once is at, and through the Firmament.
  And as these starres were but so many beads
  Strung on one string, speed undistinguish'd leads
  Her through those Spheares, as through the beads, a string,
  Whose quick succession makes it still one thing:                 210
  As doth the pith, which, lest our bodies slacke,
  Strings fast the little bones of necke, and backe;
  So by the Soule doth death string Heaven and Earth;
  For when our Soule enjoyes this her third birth,
  (Creation gave her one, a second, grace,)                        215
  Heaven is as neare, and present to her face,
  As colours are, and objects, in a roome
  Where darknesse was before, when Tapers come.
  This must, my Soule, thy long-short Progresse bee;
  To'advance these thoughts, remember then, that she,              220
  She; whose faire body no such prison was,
  But that a Soule might well be pleas'd to passe
  An age in her; she whose rich beauty lent
  Mintage to other beauties, for they went
  But for so much as they were like to her;                        225
  Shee, in whose body (if we dare preferre
  This low world, to so high a marke as shee,)
  The Westerne treasure, Easterne spicerie,
  Europe, and Afrique, and the unknowne rest
  Were easily found, or what in them was best;                     230
  And when w'have made this large discoverie
  Of all, in her some one part then will bee
  Twenty such parts, whose plenty and riches is
  Enough to make twenty such worlds as this;
  Shee, whom had they knowne who did first betroth                 235
  The Tutelar Angels, and assign'd one, both
  To Nations, Cities, and to Companies,
  To Functions, Offices, and Dignities,
  And to each severall man, to him, and him,
  They would have given her one for every limbe;                   240
  She, of whose soule, if wee may say, 'twas Gold,
  Her body was th'Electrum, and did hold
  Many degrees of that; wee understood
  Her by her sight; her pure, and eloquent blood
  Spoke in her cheekes, and so distinctly wrought,                 245
  That one might almost say, her body thought;
  Shee, shee, thus richly and largely hous'd, is gone:
  And chides us slow-pac'd snailes who crawle upon
  Our prisons prison, earth, nor thinke us well,
  Longer, then whil'st wee beare our brittle shell.                250
  But 'twere but little to have chang'd our roome,
  If, as we were in this our living Tombe
  Oppress'd with ignorance, wee still were so.
  Poore soule, in this thy flesh what dost thou know?
  Thou know'st thy selfe so little, as thou know'st not,           255
  How thou didst die, nor how thou wast begot.
  Thou neither know'st, how thou at first cam'st in,
  Nor how thou took'st the poyson of mans sinne.
  Nor dost thou, (though thou know'st, that thou art so)
  By what way thou art made immortall, know.                       260
  Thou art too narrow, wretch, to comprehend
  Even thy selfe: yea though thou wouldst but bend
  To know thy body. Have not all soules thought
  For many ages, that our body'is wrought
  Of Ayre, and Fire, and other Elements?                           265
  And now they thinke of new ingredients,
  And one Soule thinkes one, and another way
  Another thinkes, and 'tis an even lay.
  Knowst thou but how the stone doth enter in
  The bladders cave, and never breake the skinne?                  270
  Know'st thou how blood, which to the heart doth flow,
  Doth from one ventricle to th'other goe?
  And for the putrid stuffe, which thou dost spit,
  Know'st thou how thy lungs have attracted it?
  There are no passages, so that there is                          275
  (For ought thou know'st) piercing of substances.
  And of those many opinions which men raise
  Of Nailes and Haires, dost thou know which to praise?
  What hope have wee to know our selves, when wee
  Know not the least things, which for our use be?                 280
  Wee see in Authors, too stiffe to recant,
  A hundred controversies of an Ant;
  And yet one watches, starves, freeses, and sweats,
  To know but Catechismes and Alphabets
  Of unconcerning things, matters of fact;                         285
  How others on our stage their parts did Act;
  What _Cæsar_ did, yea, and what _Cicero_ said.
  Why grasse is greene, or why our blood is red,
  Are mysteries which none have reach'd unto.
  In this low forme, poore soule, what wilt thou doe?              290
  When wilt thou shake off this Pedantery,
  Of being taught by sense, and Fantasie?
  Thou look'st through spectacles; small things seeme great
  Below; But up unto the watch-towre get,
  And see all things despoyl'd of fallacies:                       295
  Thou shalt not peepe through lattices of eyes,
  Nor heare through Labyrinths of eares, nor learne
  By circuit, or collections to discerne.
  In heaven thou straight know'st all, concerning it,
  And what concernes it not, shalt straight forget.                300
  There thou (but in no other schoole) maist bee
  Perchance, as learned, and as full, as shee,
  Shee who all libraries had throughly read
  At home in her owne thoughts, and practised
  So much good as would make as many more:                         305
  Shee whose example they must all implore,
  Who would or doe, or thinke well, and confesse
  That all the vertuous Actions they expresse,
  Are but a new, and worse edition
  Of her some one thought, or one action:                          310
  She who in th'art of knowing Heaven, was growne
  Here upon earth, to such perfection,
  That she hath, ever since to Heaven she came,
  (In a far fairer print,) but read the same:
  Shee, shee not satisfied with all this waight,                   315
  (For so much knowledge, as would over-fraight
  Another, did but ballast her) is gone
  As well t'enjoy, as get perfection.
  And cals us after her, in that shee tooke,
  (Taking her selfe) our best, and worthiest booke.                320
  Returne not, my Soule, from this extasie,
  And meditation of what thou shalt bee,
  To earthly thoughts, till it to thee appeare,
  With whom thy conversation must be there.
  With whom wilt thou converse? what station                       325
  Canst thou choose out, free from infection,
  That will not give thee theirs, nor drinke in thine?
  Shalt thou not finde a spungie slacke Divine
  Drinke and sucke in th'instructions of Great men,
  And for the word of God, vent them agen?                         330
  Are there not some Courts (and then, no things bee
  So like as Courts) which, in this let us see,
  That wits and tongues of Libellers are weake,
  Because they do more ill, then these can speake?
  The poyson's gone through all, poysons affect                    335
  Chiefly the chiefest parts, but some effect
  In nailes, and haires, yea excrements, will show;
  So lyes the poyson of sinne in the most low.
  Up, up, my drowsie Soule, where thy new eare
  Shall in the Angels songs no discord heare;                      340
  Where thou shalt see the blessed Mother-maid
  Joy in not being that, which men have said.
  Where she is exalted more for being good,
  Then for her interest of Mother-hood.
  Up to those Patriarchs, which did longer sit                     345
  Expecting Christ, then they'have enjoy'd him yet.
  Up to those Prophets, which now gladly see
  Their Prophesies growne to be Historie.
  Up to th'Apostles, who did bravely runne
  All the Suns course, with more light then the Sunne.             350
  Up to those Martyrs, who did calmly bleed
  Oyle to th'Apostles Lamps, dew to their seed.
  Up to those Virgins, who thought, that almost
  They made joyntenants with the Holy Ghost,
  If they to any should his Temple give.                           355
  Up, up, for in that squadron there doth live
  She, who hath carried thither new degrees
  (As to their number) to their dignities.
  Shee, who being to her selfe a State, injoy'd
  All royalties which any State employ'd;                          360
  For shee made warres, and triumph'd; reason still
  Did not o'rthrow, but rectifie her will:
  And she made peace, for no peace is like this,
  That beauty, and chastity together kisse:
  She did high justice, for she crucified                          365
  Every first motion of rebellious pride:
  And she gave pardons, and was liberall,
  For, onely her selfe except, she pardon'd all:
  Shee coy'nd, in this, that her impressions gave
  To all our actions all the worth they have:                      370
  She gave protections; the thoughts of her brest
  Satans rude Officers could ne'r arrest.
  As these prerogatives being met in one,
  Made her a soveraigne State; religion
  Made her a Church; and these two made her all.                   375
  She who was all this All, and could not fall
  To worse, by company, (for she was still
  More Antidote, then all the world was ill,)
  Shee, shee doth leave it, and by Death, survive
  All this, in Heaven; whither who doth not strive                 380
  The more, because shees there, he doth not know
  That accidentall joyes in Heaven doe grow.
  But pause, my soule; And study, ere thou fall
  On accidentall joyes, th'essentiall.
  Still before Accessories doe abide                               385
  A triall, must the principall be tride.
  And what essentiall joy can'st thou expect
  Here upon earth? what permanent effect
  Of transitory causes? Dost thou love
  Beauty? (And beauty worthy'st is to move)                        390
  Poore cousened cousenor, _that_ she, and _that_ thou,
  Which did begin to love, are neither now;
  You are both fluid, chang'd since yesterday;
  Next day repaires, (but ill) last dayes decay.
  Nor are, (although the river keepe the name)                     395
  Yesterdaies waters, and to daies the same.
  So flowes her face, and thine eyes, neither now
  That Saint, nor Pilgrime, which your loving vow
  Concern'd, remaines; but whil'st you thinke you bee
  Constant, you'are hourely in inconstancie.                       400
  Honour may have pretence unto our love,
  Because that God did live so long above
  Without this Honour, and then lov'd it so,
  That he at last made Creatures to bestow
  Honour on him; not that he needed it,                            405
  But that, to his hands, man might grow more fit.
  But since all Honours from inferiours flow,
  (For they doe give it; Princes doe but shew
  Whom they would have so honor'd) and that this
  On such opinions, and capacities                                 410
  Is built, as rise and fall, to more and lesse:
  Alas, 'tis but a casuall happinesse.
  Hath ever any man to'himselfe assign'd
  This or that happinesse to'arrest his minde,
  But that another man which takes a worse,                        415
  Thinks him a foole for having tane that course?
  They who did labour Babels tower to'erect,
  Might have considered, that for that effect,
  All this whole solid Earth could not allow
  Nor furnish forth materialls enow;                               420
  And that this Center, to raise such a place,
  Was farre too little, to have beene the Base;
  No more affords this world, foundation
  To erect true joy, were all the meanes in one.
  But as the Heathen made them severall gods,                      425
  Of all Gods Benefits, and all his Rods,
  (For as the Wine, and Corne, and Onions are
  Gods unto them, so Agues bee, and Warre)
  And as by changing that whole precious Gold
  To such small Copper coynes, they lost the old,                  430
  And lost their only God, who ever must
  Be sought alone, and not in such a thrust:
  So much mankinde true happinesse mistakes;
  No Joy enjoyes that man, that many makes.
  Then, Soule, to thy first pitch worke up againe;                 435
  Know that all lines which circles doe containe,
  For once that they the Center touch, doe touch
  Twice the circumference; and be thou such;
  Double on heaven thy thoughts on earth emploid;
  All will not serve; Only who have enjoy'd                        440
  The sight of God, in fulnesse, can thinke it;
  For it is both the object, and the wit.
  This is essentiall joy, where neither hee
  Can suffer diminution, nor wee;
  'Tis such a full, and such a filling good;                       445
  Had th'Angels once look'd on him, they had stood.
  To fill the place of one of them, or more,
  Shee whom wee celebrate, is gone before.
  She, who had Here so much essentiall joy,
  As no chance could distract, much lesse destroy;                 450
  Who with Gods presence was acquainted so,
  (Hearing, and speaking to him) as to know
  His face in any naturall Stone, or Tree,
  Better then when in Images they bee:
  Who kept by diligent devotion,                                   455
  Gods Image, in such reparation,
  Within her heart, that what decay was growne,
  Was her first Parents fault, and not her owne:
  Who being solicited to any act,
  Still heard God pleading his safe precontract;                   460
  Who by a faithfull confidence, was here
  Betroth'd to God, and now is married there;
  Whose twilights were more cleare, then our mid-day;
  Who dreamt devoutlier, then most use to pray;
  Who being here fil'd with grace, yet strove to bee,              465
  Both where more grace, and more capacitie
  At once is given: she to Heaven is gone,
  Who made this world in some proportion
  A heaven, and here, became unto us all,
  Joy, (as our joyes admit) essentiall.                            470
  But could this low world joyes essentiall touch,
  Heavens accidentall joyes would passe them much.
  How poore and lame, must then our casuall bee?
  If thy Prince will his subjects to call thee
  _My Lord_, and this doe swell thee, thou art than,               475
  By being greater, growne to bee lesse Man.
  When no Physitian of redresse can speake,
  A joyfull casuall violence may breake
  A dangerous Apostem in thy breast;
  And whil'st thou joyest in this, the dangerous rest,             480
  The bag may rise up, and so strangle thee.
  What e'r was casuall, may ever bee.
  What should the nature change? Or make the same
  Certaine, which was but casuall, when it came?
  All casuall joy doth loud and plainly say,                       485
  Only by comming, that it can away.
  Only in Heaven joyes strength is never spent;
  And accidentall things are permanent.
  Joy of a soules arrivall ne'r decaies;
  For that soule ever joyes and ever staies.                       490
  Joy that their last great Consummation
  Approaches in the resurrection;
  When earthly bodies more celestiall
  Shall be, then Angels were, for they could fall;
  This kinde of joy doth every day admit                           495
  Degrees of growth, but none of losing it.
  In this fresh joy, 'tis no small part, that shee,
  Shee, in whose goodnesse, he that names degree,
  Doth injure her; ('Tis losse to be cal'd best,
  There where the stuffe is not such as the rest)                  500
  Shee, who left such a bodie, as even shee
  Only in Heaven could learne, how it can bee
  Made better; for shee rather was two soules,
  Or like to full on both sides written Rols,
  Where eyes might reade upon the outward skin,                    505
  As strong Records for God, as mindes within;
  Shee, who by making full perfection grow,
  Peeces a Circle, and still keepes it so,
  Long'd for, and longing for it, to heaven is gone,
  Where shee receives, and gives addition.                         510
  Here in a place, where mis-devotion frames
  A thousand Prayers to Saints, whose very names
  The ancient Church knew not, Heaven knows not yet:
  And where, what lawes of Poetry admit,
  Lawes of Religion have at least the same,                        515
  Immortall Maide, I might invoke thy name.
  Could any Saint provoke that appetite,
  Thou here should'st make me a French convertite.
  But thou would'st not; nor would'st thou be content,
  To take this, for my second yeares true Rent,                    520
  Did this Coine beare any other stampe, then his,
  That gave thee power to doe, me, to say this.
  Since his will is, that to posteritie,
  Thou should'st for life, and death, a patterne bee,
  And that the world should notice have of this,                   525
  The purpose, and th'authoritie is his;
  Thou art the Proclamation; and I am
  The Trumpet, at whose voyce the people came.






_Elegie upon the untimely death of the incomparable Prince Henry._


  Looke to mee faith, and looke to my faith, God;
  For both my centers feele this period.
  Of waight one center, one of greatnesse is;
  And Reason is that center, Faith is this;
  For into'our reason flow, and there do end                         5
  All, that this naturall world doth comprehend:
  Quotidian things, and equidistant hence,
  Shut in, for man, in one circumference.
  But for th'enormous greatnesses, which are
  So disproportion'd, and so angulare,                              10
  As is Gods essence, place and providence,
  Where, how, when, what soules do, departed hence,
  These things (eccentrique else) on faith do strike;
  Yet neither all, nor upon all, alike.
  For reason, put to'her best extension,                            15
  Almost meetes faith, and makes both centers one.
  And nothing ever came so neare to this,
  As contemplation of that Prince, wee misse.
  For all that faith might credit mankinde could,
  Reason still seconded, that this prince would.                    20
  If then least moving of the center, make
  More, then if whole hell belch'd, the world to shake,
  What must this do, centers distracted so,
  That wee see not what to beleeve or know?
  Was it not well beleev'd till now, that hee,                      25
  Whose reputation was an extasie
  On neighbour States, which knew not why to wake,
  Till hee discover'd what wayes he would take;
  For whom, what Princes angled, when they tryed,
  Met a _Torpedo_, and were stupified;                              30
  And others studies, how he would be bent;
  Was his great fathers greatest instrument,
  And activ'st spirit, to convey and tie
  This soule of peace, through Christianity?
  Was it not well beleev'd, that hee would make                     35
  This generall peace, th'Eternall overtake,
  And that his times might have stretch'd out so farre,
  As to touch those, of which they emblems are?
  For to confirme this just beleefe, that now
  The last dayes came, wee saw heav'n did allow,                    40
  That, but from his aspect and exercise,
  In peacefull times, Rumors of war did rise.
  But now this faith is heresie: we must
  Still stay, and vexe our great-grand-mother, Dust.
  Oh, is God prodigall? hath he spent his store                     45
  Of plagues, on us; and onely now, when more
  Would ease us much, doth he grudge misery;
  And will not let's enjoy our curse; to dy?
  As, for the earth throwne lowest downe of all,
  T'were an ambition to desire to fall,                             50
  So God, in our desire to dye, doth know
  Our plot for ease, in being wretched so.
  Therefore we live; though such a life wee have,
  As but so many mandrakes on his grave.
  What had his growth, and generation done,                         55
  When, what we are, his putrefaction
  Sustaines in us; Earth, which griefes animate?
  Nor hath our world now, other Soule then that.
  And could griefe get so high as heav'n, that Quire,
  Forgetting this their new joy, would desire                       60
  (With griefe to see him) hee had staid below,
  To rectifie our errours, They foreknow.
  Is th'other center, Reason, faster then?
  Where should we looke for that, now we'are not men?
  For if our Reason be'our connexion                                65
  Of causes, now to us there can be none.
  For, as, if all the substances were spent,
  'Twere madnesse, to enquire of accident,
  So is't to looke for reason, hee being gone,
  The onely subject reason wrought upon.                            70
  If Fate have such a chaine, whose divers links
  Industrious man discerneth, as hee thinks;
  When miracle doth come, and so steale in
  A new linke, man knowes not, where to begin:
  At a much deader fault must reason bee,                           75
  Death having broke off such a linke as hee.
  But now, for us, with busie proofe to come,
  That we'have no reason, would prove wee had some.
  So would just lamentations: Therefore wee
  May safelyer say, that we are dead, then hee.                     80
  So, if our griefs wee do not well declare,
  We'have double excuse; he'is not dead; and we are.
  Yet I would not dy yet; for though I bee
  Too narrow, to thinke him, as hee is hee,
  (Our Soules best baiting, and midd-period,                        85
  In her long journey, of considering God)
  Yet, (no dishonour) I can reach him thus,
  As he embrac'd the fires of love, with us.
  Oh may I, (since I live) but see, or heare,
  That she-Intelligence which mov'd this spheare,                   90
  I pardon Fate, my life: Who ere thou bee,
  Which hast the noble conscience, thou art shee,
  I conjure thee by all the charmes he spoke,
  By th'oathes, which onely you two never broke,
  By all the soules yee sigh'd, that if you see                     95
  These lines, you wish, I knew your history.
  So much, as you, two mutuall heav'ns were here,
  I were an Angell, singing what you were.


_To the Countesse of_ Bedford.


  MADAME,

_I have learn'd by those lawes wherein I am a[1] little conversant,
that hee which bestowes any cost upon the dead, obliges him which is
dead, but not the[2] heire; I do not therefore send this paper to your
Ladyship, that you should thanke mee for it, or thinke that I thanke
you in it; your favours and benefits to mee are so much above my
merits, that they are even above my gratitude, if that were to be
judged by words which must expresse it: But, Madame, since your noble
brothers fortune being yours, the evidences also concerning it are
yours,[3] so his vertue[4] being yours, the evidences concerning
it,[5] belong also to you, of which by your acceptance this may be one
peece, in which quality I humbly present it, and as a testimony how
intirely your familie possesseth_

  Your Ladiships most humble
  and thankfull servant

  JOHN DONNE.




_Obsequies to the Lord Harrington, brother to the Lady Lucy,
Countesse of Bedford._


  Faire soule, which wast, not onely, as all soules bee,
  Then when thou wast infused, harmony,
  But did'st continue so; and now dost beare
  A part in Gods great organ, this whole Spheare:
  If looking up to God; or downe to us,                              5
  Thou finde that any way is pervious,
  Twixt heav'n and earth, and that mans actions doe
  Come to your knowledge, and affections too,
  See, and with joy, mee to that good degree
  Of goodnesse growne, that I can studie thee,                      10
  And, by these meditations refin'd,
  Can unapparell and enlarge my minde,
  And so can make by this soft extasie,
  This place a map of heav'n, my selfe of thee.
  Thou seest mee here at midnight, now all rest;                    15
  Times dead-low water; when all mindes devest
  To morrows businesse, when the labourers have
  Such rest in bed, that their last Church-yard grave,
  Subject to change, will scarce be'a type of this,
  Now when the clyent, whose last hearing is                        20
  To morrow, sleeps, when the condemned man,
  (Who when hee opes his eyes, must shut them than
  Againe by death,) although sad watch hee keepe,
  Doth practice dying by a little sleepe,
  Thou at this midnight seest mee, and as soone                     25
  As that Sunne rises to mee, midnight's noone,
  All the world growes transparent, and I see
  Through all, both Church and State, in seeing thee;
  And I discerne by favour of this light,
  My selfe, the hardest object of the sight.                        30
  God is the glasse; as thou when thou dost see
  Him who sees all, seest all concerning thee,
  So, yet unglorified, I comprehend
  All, in these mirrors of thy wayes, and end.
  Though God be our true glasse, through which we see               35
  All, since the beeing of all things is hee,
  Yet are the trunkes which doe to us derive
  Things, in proportion fit, by perspective,
  Deeds of good men; for by their living here,
  Vertues, indeed remote, seeme to be neare.                        40
  But where can I affirme, or where arrest
  My thoughts on his deeds? which shall I call best?
  For fluid vertue cannot be look'd on,
  Nor can endure a contemplation.
  As bodies change, and as I do not weare                           45
  Those Spirits, humors, blood I did last yeare,
  And, as if on a streame I fixe mine eye,
  That drop, which I looked on, is presently
  Pusht with more waters from my sight, and gone,
  So in this sea of vertues, can no one                             50
  Bee'insisted on; vertues, as rivers, passe,
  Yet still remaines that vertuous man there was.
  And as if man feed on mans flesh, and so
  Part of his body to another owe,
  Yet at the last two perfect bodies rise,                          55
  Because God knowes where every Atome lyes;
  So, if one knowledge were made of all those,
  Who knew his minutes well, hee might dispose
  His vertues into names, and ranks; but I
  Should injure Nature, Vertue, and Destinie,                       60
  Should I divide and discontinue so,
  Vertue, which did in one intirenesse grow.
  For as, hee that would say, spirits are fram'd
  Of all the purest parts that can be nam'd,
  Honours not spirits halfe so much, as hee                         65
  Which sayes, they have no parts, but simple bee;
  So is't of vertue; for a point and one
  Are much entirer then a million.
  And had Fate meant to have his vertues told,
  It would have let him live to have beene old;                     70
  So, then that vertue in season, and then this,
  We might have seene, and said, that now he is
  Witty, now wise, now temperate, now just:
  In good short lives, vertues are faine to thrust,
  And to be sure betimes to get a place,                            75
  When they would exercise, lacke time, and space.
  So was it in this person, forc'd to bee
  For lack of time, his owne epitome:
  So to exhibit in few yeares as much,
  As all the long breath'd Chronicles can touch.                    80
  As when an Angell down from heav'n doth flye,
  Our quick thought cannot keepe him company,
  Wee cannot thinke, now hee is at the Sunne,
  Now through the Moon, now he through th'aire doth run,
  Yet when he's come, we know he did repaire                        85
  To all twixt Heav'n and Earth, Sunne, Moon, and Aire;
  And as this Angell in an instant knowes,
  And yet wee know, this sodaine knowledge growes
  By quick amassing severall formes of things,
  Which he successively to order brings;                            90
  When they, whose slow-pac'd lame thoughts cannot goe
  So fast as hee, thinke that he doth not so;
  Just as a perfect reader doth not dwell,
  On every syllable, nor stay to spell,
  Yet without doubt, hee doth distinctly see                        95
  And lay together every A, and B;
  So, in short liv'd good men, is'not understood
  Each severall vertue, but the compound good;
  For, they all vertues paths in that pace tread,
  As Angells goe, and know, and as men read.                       100
  O why should then these men, these lumps of Balme
  Sent hither, this worlds tempests to becalme,
  Before by deeds they are diffus'd and spred,
  And so make us alive, themselves be dead?
  O Soule, O circle, why so quickly bee                            105
  Thy ends, thy birth and death, clos'd up in thee?
  Since one foot of thy compasse still was plac'd
  In heav'n, the other might securely'have pac'd
  In the most large extent, through every path,
  Which the whole world, or man the abridgment hath.               110
  Thou knowst, that though the tropique circles have
  (Yea and those small ones which the Poles engrave,)
  All the same roundnesse, evennesse, and all
  The endlesnesse of the equinoctiall;
  Yet, when we come to measure distances,                          115
  How here, how there, the Sunne affected is,
  When he doth faintly worke, and when prevaile,
  Onely great circles, than can be our scale:
  So, though thy circle to thy selfe expresse
  All, tending to thy endlesse happinesse,                         120
  And wee, by our good use of it may trye,
  Both how to live well young, and how to die,
  Yet, since we must be old, and age endures
  His Torrid Zone at Court, and calentures
  Of hot ambitions, irrelegions ice,                               125
  Zeales agues, and hydroptique avarice,
  Infirmities which need the scale of truth,
  As well as lust, and ignorance of youth;
  Why did'st thou not for these give medicines too,
  And by thy doing tell us what to doe?                            130
  Though as small pocket-clocks, whose every wheele
  Doth each mismotion and distemper feele,
  Whose _hand_ gets shaking palsies, and whose _string_
  (His sinewes) slackens, and whose _Soule_, the spring,
  Expires, or languishes, whose pulse, the _flye_,                 135
  Either beates not, or beates unevenly,
  Whose voice, the _Bell_, doth rattle, or grow dumbe,
  Or idle,'as men, which to their last houres come,
  If these clockes be not wound, or be wound still,
  Or be not set, or set at every will;                             140
  So, youth is easiest to destruction,
  If then wee follow all, or follow none.
  Yet, as in great clocks, which in steeples chime,
  Plac'd to informe whole towns, to'imploy their time,
  An error doth more harme, being generall,                        145
  When, small clocks faults, only'on the wearer fall;
  So worke the faults of age, on which the eye
  Of children, servants, or the State relie.
  Why wouldst not thou then, which hadst such a soule,
  A clock so true, as might the Sunne controule,                   150
  And daily hadst from him, who gave it thee,
  Instructions, such as it could never be
  Disordered, stay here, as a generall
  And great Sun-dyall, to have set us All?
  O why wouldst thou be any instrument                             155
  To this unnaturall course, or why consent
  To this, not miracle, but Prodigie,
  That when the ebbs, longer then flowings be,
  Vertue, whose flood did with thy youth begin,
  Should so much faster ebb out, then flow in?                     160
  Though her flood was blowne in, by thy first breath,
  All is at once sunke in the whirle-poole death.
  Which word I would not name, but that I see
  Death, else a desert, growne a Court by thee.
  Now I grow sure, that if a man would have                        165
  Good companie, his entry is a grave.
  Mee thinkes all Cities, now, but Anthills bee,
  Where, when the severall labourers I see,
  For children, house, Provision, taking paine,
  They'are all but Ants, carrying eggs, straw, and grain;          170
  And Church-yards are our cities, unto which
  The most repaire, that are in goodnesse rich.
  There is the best concourse, and confluence,
  There are the holy suburbs, and from thence
  Begins Gods City, New Jerusalem,                                 175
  Which doth extend her utmost gates to them.
  At that gate then Triumphant soule, dost thou
  Begin thy Triumph; But since lawes allow
  That at the Triumph day, the people may,
  All that they will, 'gainst the Triumpher say,                   180
  Let me here use that freedome, and expresse
  My griefe, though not to make thy Triumph lesse.
  By law, to Triumphs none admitted bee,
  Till they as Magistrates get victorie;
  Though then to thy force, all youthes foes did yield,            185
  Yet till fit time had brought thee to that field,
  To which thy ranke in this state destin'd thee,
  That there thy counsailes might get victorie,
  And so in that capacitie remove
  All jealousies 'twixt Prince and subjects love,                  190
  Thou could'st no title, to this triumph have,
  Thou didst intrude on death, usurp'dst a grave.
  Then (though victoriously) thou hadst fought as yet
  But with thine owne affections, with the heate
  Of youths desires, and colds of ignorance,                       195
  But till thou should'st successefully advance
  Thine armes 'gainst forraine enemies, which are
  Both Envy, and acclamations popular,
  (For, both these engines equally defeate,
  Though by a divers Mine, those which are great,)                 200
  Till then thy War was but a civill War,
  For which to Triumph, none admitted are.
  No more are they, who though with good successe,
  In a defensive war, their power expresse;
  Before men triumph, the dominion                                 205
  Must be _enlarg'd_ and not _preserv'd_ alone;
  Why should'st thou then, whose battailes were to win
  Thy selfe, from those straits nature put thee in,
  And to deliver up to God that state,
  Of which he gave thee the vicariate,                             210
  (Which is thy soule and body) as intire
  As he, who takes endeavours, doth require,
  But didst not stay, t'enlarge his kingdome too,
  By making others, what thou didst, to doe;
  Why shouldst thou Triumph now, when Heav'n no more               216
  Hath got, by getting thee, then't had before?
  For, Heav'n and thou, even when thou livedst here,
  Of one another in possession were.
  But this from Triumph most disables thee,
  That, that place which is conquered, must bee                    220
  Left safe from present warre, and likely doubt
  Of imminent commotions to breake out:
  And hath he left us so? or can it bee
  His territory was no more then Hee?
  No, we were all his charge, the Diocis                           225
  Of ev'ry exemplar man, the whole world is,
  And he was joyned in commission
  With Tutelar Angels, sent to every one.
  But though this freedome to upbraid, and chide
  Him who Triumph'd, were lawfull, it was ty'd                     230
  With this, that it might never reference have
  Unto the Senate, who this triumph gave;
  Men might at Pompey jeast, but they might not
  At that authoritie, by which he got
  Leave to Triumph, before, by age, he might;                      235
  So, though, triumphant soule, I dare to write,
  Mov'd with a reverentiall anger, thus,
  That thou so earely wouldst abandon us;
  Yet I am farre from daring to dispute
  With that great soveraigntie, whose absolute                     240
  Prerogative hath thus dispens'd with thee,
  'Gainst natures lawes, which just impugners bee
  Of early triumphs; And I (though with paine)
  Lessen our losse, to magnifie thy gaine
  Of triumph, when I say, It was more fit,                         245
  That all men should lacke thee, then thou lack it.
  Though then in our time, be not suffered
  That testimonie of love, unto the dead,
  To die with them, and in their graves be hid,
  As Saxon wives, and French soldurii did;                         250
  And though in no degree I can expresse
  Griefe in great Alexanders great excesse,
  Who at his friends death, made whole townes devest
  Their walls and bullwarks which became them best:
  Doe not, faire soule, this sacrifice refuse,                     255
  That in thy grave I doe interre my Muse,
  Who, by my griefe, great as thy worth, being cast
  Behind hand, yet hath spoke, and spoke her last.




_Elegie on the Lady_ Marckham.


  Man is the World, and death th'Ocean,
    To which God gives the lower parts of man.
  This Sea invirons all, and though as yet
    God hath set markes, and bounds, twixt us and it,
  Yet doth it rore, and gnaw, and still pretend,                     5
    And breaks our bankes, when ere it takes a friend.
  Then our land waters (teares of passion) vent;
    Our waters, then, above our firmament,
  (Teares which our Soule doth for her sins let fall)
    Take all a brackish taft, and Funerall,                         10
  And even these teares, which should wash sin, are sin.
    We, after Gods _Noe_, drowne our world againe.
  Nothing but man of all invenom'd things
    Doth worke upon itselfe, with inborne stings.
  Teares are false Spectacles, we cannot see                        15
    Through passions mist, what wee are, or what shee.
  In her this sea of death hath made no breach,
    But as the tide doth wash the slimie beach,
  And leaves embroder'd workes upon the sand,
    So is her flesh refin'd by deaths cold hand.                    20
  As men of China,'after an ages stay,
    Do take up Porcelane, where they buried Clay;
  So at this grave, her limbecke, which refines
    The Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Pearles, and Mines,
  Of which this flesh was, her soule shall inspire                  25
    Flesh of such stuffe, as God, when his last fire
  Annuls this world, to recompence it, shall,
    Make and name then, th'Elixar of this All.
  They say, the sea, when it gaines, loseth too;
    If carnall Death (the yonger brother) doe                       30
  Usurpe the body,'our soule, which subject is
    To th'elder death, by sinne, is freed by this;
  They perish both, when they attempt the just;
    For, graves our trophies are, and both deaths dust.
  So, unobnoxious now, she'hath buried both;                        35
    For, none to death sinnes, that to sinne is loth,
  Nor doe they die, which are not loth to die;
    So hath she this, and that virginity.
  Grace was in her extremely diligent,
    That kept her from sinne, yet made her repent.                  40
  Of what small spots pure white complaines! Alas,
    How little poyson cracks a christall glasse!
  She sinn'd, but just enough to let us see
    That God's word must be true, All, sinners be.
  Soe much did zeale her conscience rarefie                         45
    That, extreme truth lack'd little of a lye,
  Making omissions, acts; laying the touch
    Of sinne, on things that sometimes may be such.
  As _Moses_ Cherubines, whose natures doe
    Surpasse all speed, by him are winged too:                      50
  So would her soule, already'in heaven, seeme then,
    To clyme by teares, the common staires of men.
  How fit she was for God, I am content
    To speake, that Death his vaine hast may repent.
  How fit for us, how even and how sweet,                           55
    How good in all her titles, and how meet,
  To have reform'd this forward heresie,
    That women can no parts of friendship bee;
  How Morall, how Divine shall not be told,
    Lest they that heare her vertues, thinke her old:               60
  And lest we take Deaths part, and make him glad
    Of such a prey, and to his tryumph adde.



_Elegie on M^{ris}_ Boulstred.


  Death I recant, and say, unsaid by mee
    What ere hath slip'd, that might diminish thee.
  Spirituall treason, atheisme 'tis, to say,
    That any can thy Summons disobey.
  Th'earths face is but thy Table; there are set                     5
    Plants, cattell, men, dishes for Death to eate.
  In a rude hunger now hee millions drawes
    Into his bloody, or plaguy, or sterv'd jawes.
  Now hee will seeme to spare, and doth more wast,
    Eating the best first, well preserv'd to last.                  10
  Now wantonly he spoiles, and eates us not,
    But breakes off friends, and lets us peecemeale rot.
  Nor will this earth serve him; he sinkes the deepe
    Where harmelesse fish monastique silence keepe,
  Who (were Death dead) by Roes of living sand,                     15
    Might spunge that element, and make it land.
  He rounds the aire, and breakes the hymnique notes
    In birds (Heavens choristers,) organique throats,
  Which (if they did not dye) might seeme to bee
    A tenth ranke in the heavenly hierarchie.                       20
  O strong and long-liv'd death, how cam'st thou in?
    And how without Creation didst begin?
  Thou hast, and shalt see dead, before thou dyest,
    All the foure Monarchies, and Antichrist.
  How could I thinke thee nothing, that see now                     25
    In all this All, nothing else is, but thou.
  Our births and lives, vices, and vertues, bee
    Wastfull consumptions, and degrees of thee.
  For, wee to live, our bellowes weare, and breath,
    Nor are wee mortall, dying, dead, but death.                    30
  And though thou beest, O mighty bird of prey,
    So much reclaim'd by God, that thou must lay
  All that thou kill'st at his feet, yet doth hee
    Reserve but few, and leaves the most to thee.
  And of those few, now thou hast overthrowne                       35
    One whom thy blow makes, not ours, nor thine own.
  She was more stories high: hopelesse to come
    To her Soule, thou'hast offer'd at her lower roome.
  Her Soule and body was a King and Court:
    But thou hast both of Captaine mist and fort.                   40
  As houses fall not, though the King remove,
    Bodies of Saints rest for their soules above.
  Death gets 'twixt soules and bodies such a place
    As sinne insinuates 'twixt just men and grace,
  Both worke a separation, no divorce.                              45
    Her Soule is gone to usher up her corse
  Which shall be'almost another soule, for there
    Bodies are purer, then best Soules are here,
  Because in her, her virtues did outgoe
    Her yeares, would'st thou, O emulous death, do so?              50
  And kill her young to thy losse? must the cost
    Of beauty,'and wit, apt to doe harme, be lost?
  What though thou found'st her proofe 'gainst sins of youth?
    Oh, every age a diverse sinne pursueth.
  Thou should'st have stay'd, and taken better hold,                55
    Shortly, ambitious; covetous, when old,
  She might have prov'd: and such devotion
    Might once have stray'd to superstition.
  If all her vertues must have growne, yet might
    Abundant virtue'have bred a proud delight.                      60
  Had she persever'd just, there would have bin
    Some that would sinne, mis-thinking she did sinne.
  Such as would call her friendship, love, and faine
    To sociablenesse, a name profane;
  Or sinne, by tempting, or, not daring that,                       65
    By wishing, though they never told her what.
  Thus might'st thou'have slain more soules, had'st thou not crost
    Thy selfe, and to triumph, thine army lost.
  Yet though these wayes be lost, thou hast left one,
    Which is, immoderate griefe that she is gone.                   70
  But we may scape that sinne, yet weepe as much,
    Our teares are due, because we are not such.
  Some teares, that knot of friends, her death must cost,
    Because the chaine is broke, though no linke lost.



ELEGIE.

_Death._


  Language thou art too narrow, and too weake
    To ease us now; great sorrow cannot speake;
  If we could sigh out accents, and weepe words,
    Griefe weares, and lessens, that tears breath affords.
  Sad hearts, the lesse they seeme the more they are,                5
    (So guiltiest men stand mutest at the barre)
  Not that they know not, feele not their estate,
    But extreme sense hath made them desperate.
  Sorrow, to whom we owe all that we bee;
    Tyrant, in the fift and greatest Monarchy,                      10
  Was't, that she did possesse all hearts before,
    Thou hast kil'd her, to make thy Empire more?
  Knew'st thou some would, that knew her not, lament,
    As in a deluge perish th'innocent?
  Was't not enough to have that palace wonne,                       15
    But thou must raze it too, that was undone?
  Had'st thou staid there, and look'd out at her eyes,
    All had ador'd thee that now from thee flies,
  For they let out more light, then they tooke in,
    They told not when, but did the day beginne.                    20
  She was too Saphirine, and cleare for thee;
    Clay, flint, and jeat now thy fit dwellings be;
  Alas, shee was too pure, but not too weake;
    Who e'r saw Christall Ordinance but would break?
  And if wee be thy conquest, by her fall                           25
    Th'hast lost thy end, for in her perish all;
  Or if we live, we live but to rebell,
    They know her better now, that knew her well.
  If we should vapour out, and pine, and die;
    Since, shee first went, that were not miserie.                  30
  Shee chang'd our world with hers; now she is gone,
    Mirth and prosperity is oppression;
  For of all morall vertues she was all,
    The Ethicks speake of vertues Cardinall.
  Her soule was Paradise; the Cherubin                              35
    Set to keepe it was grace, that kept out sinne.
  Shee had no more then let in death, for wee
    All reape consumption from one fruitfull tree.
  God tooke her hence, lest some of us should love
    Her, like that plant, him and his lawes above,                  40
  And when wee teares, hee mercy shed in this,
    To raise our mindes to heaven where now she is;
  Who if her vertues would have let her stay
    Wee'had had a Saint, have now a holiday.
  Her heart was that strange bush, where, sacred fire,              45
    Religion, did not consume, but'inspire
  Such piety, so chast use of Gods day,
    That what we turne to _feast_, she turn'd to _pray_,
  And did prefigure here, in devout tast,
    The rest of her high Sabaoth, which shall last.                 50
  Angels did hand her up, who next God dwell,
    (For she was of that order whence most fell)
  Her body left with us, lest some had said,
    Shee could not die, except they saw her dead;
  For from lesse vertue, and lesse beautiousnesse,                  55
    The Gentiles fram'd them Gods and Goddesses.
  The ravenous earth that now wooes her to be
    Earth too, will be a _Lemnia_; and the tree
  That wraps that christall in a wooden Tombe,
    Shall be tooke up spruce, fill'd with diamond;                  60
  And we her sad glad friends all beare a part
    Of griefe, for all would waste a Stoicks heart.



_Elegie on the L. C._


  Sorrow, who to this house scarce knew the way:
  Is, Oh, heire of it, our All is his prey.
  This strange chance claimes strange wonder, and to us
  Nothing can be so strange, as to weepe thus.
  'Tis well his lifes loud speaking workes deserve,                  5
  And give praise too, our cold tongues could not serve:
  'Tis well, hee kept teares from our eyes before,
  That to fit this deepe ill, we might have store.
  Oh, if a sweet briar, climbe up by'a tree,
  If to a paradise that transplanted bee,                           10
  Or fell'd, and burnt for holy sacrifice,
  Yet, that must wither, which by it did rise,
  As we for him dead: though no familie
  Ere rigg'd a soule for heavens discoverie
  With whom more Venturers more boldly dare                         15
  Venture their states, with him in joy to share.
  Wee lose what all friends lov'd, him; he gaines now
  But life by death, which worst foes would allow,
  If hee could have foes, in whose practise grew
  All vertues, whose names subtile Schoolmen knew.                  20
  What ease, can hope that wee shall see'him, beget,
  When wee must die first, and cannot dye yet?
  His children are his pictures, Oh they bee
  Pictures of him dead, senselesse, cold as he.
  Here needs no marble Tombe, since hee is gone,                    25
  He, and about him, his, are turn'd to stone.



_An hymne to the Saints, and to Marquesse Hamylton._

  _To Sir Robert Carr._

  SIR,

  _I Presume you rather try what you can doe in me, then what I can
  doe in verse; you know my uttermost when it was best, and even then
  I did best when I had least truth for my subjects. In this present
  case there is so much truth as it defeats all Poetry.
  Call therefore this paper by what name you will, and, if it bee not
  worthy of him, nor of you, nor of mee, smother it, and bee that the
  sacrifice. If you had commanded mee to have waited on his body to
  Scotland and preached there, I would have embraced the obligation
  with more alacrity; But, I thanke you that you would command me
  that which I was loath to doe, for, even that hath given a
  tincture of merit to the obedience of_

  Your poore friend and
    servant in Christ Jesus

  I. D.



  Whether that soule which now comes up to you
  Fill any former ranke or make a new;
  Whether it take a name nam'd there before,
  Or be a name it selfe, and _order_ more
  Then was in heaven till now; (for may not hee                      5
  Bee so, if every severall Angell bee
  A _kind_ alone?) What ever order grow
  Greater by him in heaven, wee doe not so.
  One of your orders growes by his accesse;
  But, by his losse grow all our _orders_ lesse;                    10
  The name of _Father_, _Master_, _Friend_, the name
  Of _Subject_ and of _Prince_, in one are lame;
  Faire mirth is dampt, and conversation black,
  The _household_ widdow'd, and the _garter_ slack;
  The _Chappell_ wants an eare, _Councell_ a tongue;                15
  _Story_, a theame; and _Musicke_ lacks a song;
  Blest _order_ that hath him! the losse of him
  Gangreend all _Orders_ here; all lost a limbe.
  Never made body such hast to confesse
  What a soule was; All former comelinesse                          20
  Fled, in a minute, when the soule was gone,
  And, having lost that beauty, would have none;
  So fell our _Monasteries_, in one instant growne
  Not to lesse houses, but, to heapes of stone;
  So sent this body that faire forme it wore,                       25
  Unto the spheare of formes, and doth (before
  His soule shall fill up his sepulchrall stone,)
  Anticipate a Resurrection;
  For, as in his fame, now, his soule is here,
  So, in the forme thereof his bodie's there.                       30
  And if, faire soule, not with first _Innocents_
  Thy station be, but with the _Pænitents_,
  (And, who shall dare to aske then when I am
  Dy'd scarlet in the blood of that pure Lambe,
  Whether that colour, which is scarlet then,                       35
  Were black or white before in eyes of men?)
  When thou rememb'rest what sins thou didst finde
  Amongst those many friends now left behinde,
  And seest such sinners as they are, with thee
  Got thither by repentance, Let it bee                             40
  Thy wish to wish all there, to wish them cleane;
  Wim _him_ a _David_, _her_ a _Magdalen_.





EPITAPHS.


EPITAPH ON HIMSELFE.

_To the Countesse of Bedford._


MADAME,

  That I might make your Cabinet my tombe,
    And for my fame which I love next my soule,
  Next to my soule provide the happiest roome,
    Admit to that place this last funerall Scrowle.
      Others by Wills give Legacies, but I                           5
      Dying, of you doe beg a Legacie.

  My fortune and my will this custome breake,
  When we are senselesse grown to make stones speak,
  Though no stone tell thee what I was, yet thou
  In my graves inside see what thou art now:                        10
  Yet th'art not yet so good; till us death lay
  To ripe and mellow there, w'are stubborne clay,
  Parents make us earth, and soules dignifie
  Vs to be glasse, here to grow gold we lie;
  Whilst in our soules sinne bred and pampered is,                  15
  Our soules become worme-eaten Carkasses.







_Omnibus._


  My Fortune and my choice this custome break,
  When we are speechlesse grown, to make stones speak,
  Though no stone tell thee what I was, yet thou
  In my graves inside seest what thou art now:
  Yet thou'art not yet so good, till death us lay                    5
  To ripe and mellow here, we are stubborne Clay.
  Parents make us earth, and soules dignifie
  Vs to be glasse; here to grow gold we lie.
  Whilst in our soules sinne bred and pamper'd is,
  Our soules become wormeaten carkases;                             10
  So we our selves miraculously destroy.
  Here bodies with lesse miracle enjoy
  Such priviledges, enabled here to scale
  Heaven, when the Trumpets ayre shall them exhale.
  Heare this, and mend thy selfe, and thou mendst me,               15
  By making me being dead, doe good to thee,
    And thinke me well compos'd, that I could now
    A last-sicke houre to syllables allow.




EPISTLE.


Others at the Porches and entries of their Buildings set their Armes;
I, my picture; if any colours can deliver a minde so plaine, and flat,
and through light as mine. Naturally at a new Author, I doubt, and
sticke, and doe not say quickly, good. I censure much and taxe; And
this liberty costs mee more then others, by how much my owne things
are worse then others. Yet I would not be so rebellious against my
selfe, as not to doe it, since I love it; nor so unjust to others, to
do it _sine talione_. As long as I give them as good hold upon mee,
they must pardon mee my bitings. I forbid no reprehender, but him that
like the Trent Councell forbids not bookes, but Authors, damning what
ever such a name hath or shall write. None writes so ill, that he
gives not some thing exemplary, to follow, or flie. Now when I beginne
this booke, I have no purpose to come into any mans debt[1]; how my
stocke will hold out I know not; perchance waste, perchance increase
in use; if I doe borrow any thing of Antiquitie, besides that I make
account that I pay it to posterity, with as much and as good: You
shall still finde mee to acknowledge it, and to thanke not him onely
that hath digg'd out treasure for mee, but that hath lighted mee a
candle to the place. All which I will bid you remember, (for I will
have no such Readers as I can teach) is, that the Pithagorian doctrine
doth not onely carry one soule from man to man, nor man to beast, but
indifferently to plants also: and therefore you must not grudge to
finde the same soule in an Emperour, in a Post-horse, and in a
Mucheron,[2] since no unreadinesse in the soule, but an indisposition
in the organs workes this. And therefore though this soule could not
move when it was a Melon, yet it may remember, and now tell mee,[3] at
what lascivious banquet it was serv'd. And though it could not speake,
when it was a spider, yet it can remember and now tell me, who used it
for poyson to attaine dignitie. How ever the bodies have dull'd her
other faculties, her memory hath ever been her owne,
  which makes me so seriously deliver you by her
    relation all her passages from her first making
        when shee was that apple[4] which Eve
          eate,[5] to this time when shee is
            hee,[6] whose life you shall
              finde in the end of
                  this booke.






THE PROGRESSE OF THE SOULE.


_First Song._


I.

  I sing the progresse of a deathlesse soule,
  Whom Fate, which God made, but doth not controule,
  Plac'd in most shapes; all times before the law
  Yoak'd us, and when, and since, in this I sing.
  And the great world to his aged evening;                           5
  From infant morne, through manly noone I draw.
  What the gold Chaldee, or silver Persian saw,
  Greeke brasse, or Roman iron, is in this one;
  A worke t'outweare _Seths_ pillars, bricke and stone,
    And (holy writt excepted) made to yeeld to none.                10


II.

  Thee, eye of heaven, this great Soule envies not,
  By thy male force, is all wee have, begot.
  In the first East, thou now beginst to shine,
  Suck'st early balme, and Iland spices there,
  And wilt anon in thy loose-rein'd careere                         15
  At Tagus, Po, Sene, Thames, and Danow dine,
  And see at night thy Westerne land of Myne,
  Yet hast thou not more nations seene then shee,
  That before thee, one day beganne to bee,
    And thy fraile light being quench'd, shall long,
      long out live thee.                                           20


III.

  Nor, holy _Ianus_, in whose soveraigne boate
  The Church, and all the Monarchies did floate;
  That swimming Colledge, and free Hospitall
  Of all mankinde, that cage and vivarie
  Of fowles, and beasts, in whose wombe, Destinie                   25
  Us, and our latest nephewes did install
  (From thence are all deriv'd, that fill this All,)
  Did'st thou in that great stewardship embarke
  So diverse shapes into that floating parke,
    As have beene moved, and inform'd by this heavenly sparke.      30


IV.

  Great Destiny the Commissary of God,
  That hast mark'd out a path and period
  For every thing; who, where wee of-spring tooke,
  Our wayes and ends seest at one instant; Thou
  Knot of all causes, thou whose changelesse brow                   35
  Ne'r smiles nor frownes, O vouch thou safe to looke
  And shew my story, in thy eternall booke:
  That (if my prayer be fit) I may'understand
  So much my selfe, as to know with what hand,
    How scant, or liberall this my lifes race is spand.             40


V.

  To my sixe lustres almost now outwore,
  Except thy booke owe mee so many more,
  Except my legend be free from the letts
  Of steepe ambition, sleepie povertie,
  Spirit-quenching sicknesse, dull captivitie,                      45
  Distracting businesse, and from beauties nets,
  And all that calls from this, and to others whets,
  O let me not launch out, but let mee save
  Th'expense of braine and spirit; that my grave
    His right and due, a whole unwasted man may have.               50


VI.

  But if my dayes be long, and good enough,
  In vaine this sea shall enlarge, or enrough
  It selfe; for I will through the wave, and fome,
  And shall, in sad lone wayes a lively spright,
  Make my darke heavy Poëm light, and light.                        55
  For though through many streights, and lands I roame,
  I launch at paradise, and I saile towards home;
  The course I there began, shall here be staid,
  Sailes hoised there, stroke here, and anchors laid
    In Thames, which were at Tigrys, and Euphrates waide.           60


VII.

  For the great soule which here amongst us now
  Doth dwell, and moves that hand, and tongue, and brow,
  Which, as the Moone the sea, moves us; to heare
  Whose story, with long patience you will long;
  (For 'tis the crowne, and last straine of my song)                65
  This soule to whom _Luther_, and _Mahomet_ were
  Prisons of flesh; this soule which oft did teare,
  And mend the wracks of th'Empire, and late Rome,
  And liv'd when every great change did come,
    Had first in paradise, a low, but fatall roome.                 70


VIII.

  Yet no low roome, nor then the greatest, lesse,
  If (as devout and sharpe men fitly guesse)
  That Crosse, our joy, and griefe, where nailes did tye
  That All, which alwayes was all, every where;
  Which could not sinne, and yet all sinnes did beare;              75
  Which could not die, yet could not chuse but die;
  Stood in the selfe same roome in Calvarie,
  Where first grew the forbidden learned tree,
  For on that tree hung in security
    This Soule, made by the Makers will from pulling free.          80


IX.

  Prince of the orchard, faire as dawning morne,
  Fenc'd with the law, and ripe as soone as borne
  That apple grew, which this Soule did enlive,
  Till the then climing serpent, that now creeps
  For that offence, for which all mankinde weepes,                  85
  Tooke it, and t'her whom the first man did wive
  (Whom and her race, only forbiddings drive)
  He gave it, she, t'her husband, both did eate;
  So perished the eaters, and the meate:
    And wee (for treason taints the blood) thence die and sweat.    90


X.

  Man all at once was there by woman slaine,
  And one by one we'are here slaine o'er againe
  By them. The mother poison'd the well-head,
  The daughters here corrupt us, Rivolets;
  No smalnesse scapes, no greatnesse breaks their nets;             95
  She thrust us out, and by them we are led
  Astray, from turning, to whence we are fled.
  Were prisoners Judges, 'twould seeme rigorous,
  Shee sinn'd, we beare; part of our paine is, thus
    To love them, whose fault to this painfull love yoak'd us.     100


XI.

  So fast in us doth this corruption grow,
  That now wee dare aske why wee should be so.
  Would God (disputes the curious Rebell) make
  A law, and would not have it kept? Or can
  His creatures will, crosse his? Of every man                     105
  For one, will God (and be just) vengeance take?
  Who sinn'd? t'was not forbidden to the snake
  Nor her, who was not then made; nor is't writ
  That Adam cropt, or knew the apple; yet
    The worme and she, and he, and wee endure for it.              110


XII.

  But snatch mee heavenly Spirit from this vaine
  Reckoning their vanities, lesse is their gaine
  Then hazard still, to meditate on ill,
  Though with good minde; their reasons, like those toyes
  Of glassie bubbles, which the gamesome boyes                     115
  Stretch to so nice a thinnes through a quill
  That they themselves breake, doe themselves spill:
  Arguing is heretiques game, and Exercise
  As wrastlers, perfects them; Not liberties
    Of speech, but silence; hands, not tongues, end heresies.      120


XIII.

  Just in that instant when the serpents gripe,
  Broke the slight veines, and tender conduit-pipe,
  Through which this soule from the trees root did draw
  Life, and growth to this apple, fled away
  This loose soule, old, one and another day.                      125
  As lightning, which one scarce dares say, he saw,
  'Tis so soone gone, (and better proofe the law
  Of sense, then faith requires) swiftly she flew
  To a darke and foggie Plot; Her, her fates threw
    There through th'earths pores, and in a Plant hous'd her anew. 130


XIV.

  The plant thus abled, to it selfe did force
  A place, where no place was; by natures course
  As aire from water, water fleets away
  From thicker bodies, by this root thronged so
  His spungie confines gave him place to grow:                     135
  Just as in our streets, when the people stay
  To see the Prince, and have so fill'd the way
  That weesels scarce could passe, when she comes nere
  They throng and cleave up, and a passage cleare,
    As if, for that time, their round bodies flatned were.         140


XV.

  His right arme he thrust out towards the East,
  West-ward his left; th'ends did themselves digest
  Into ten lesser strings, these fingers were:
  And as a slumberer stretching on his bed,
  This way he this, and that way scattered                         145
  His other legge, which feet with toes upbeare.
  Grew on his middle parts, the first day, haire,
  To show, that in loves businesse hee should still
  A dealer bee, and be us'd well, or ill:
    His apples kindle, his leaves, force of conception kill.       150


XVI.

  A mouth, but dumbe, he hath; blinde eyes, deafe eares,
  And to his shoulders dangle subtile haires;
  A young _Colossus_ there hee stands upright,
  And as that ground by him were conquered
  A leafie garland weares he on his head                           155
  Enchas'd with little fruits, so red and bright
  That for them you would call your Loves lips white;
  So, of a lone unhaunted place possest,
  Did this soules second Inne, built by the guest,
    This living buried man, this quiet mandrake, rest.             160


XVII.

  No lustfull woman came this plant to grieve,
  But 'twas because there was none yet but Eve:
  And she (with other purpose) kill'd it quite;
  Her sinne had now brought in infirmities,
  And so her cradled child, the moist red eyes                     165
  Had never shut, nor slept since it saw light;
  Poppie she knew, she knew the mandrakes might,
  And tore up both, and so coold her childs blood;
  Unvirtuous weeds might long unvex'd have stood;
    But hee's short liv'd, that with his death can doe most good.  170


XVIII.

  To an unfetterd soules quick nimble hast
  Are falling stars, and hearts thoughts, but slow pac'd:
  Thinner then burnt aire flies this soule, and she
  Whom foure new comming, and foure parting Suns
  Had found, and left the Mandrakes tenant, runnes                 175
  Thoughtlesse of change, when her firme destiny
  Confin'd, and enjayld her, that seem'd so free,
  Into a small blew shell, the which a poore
  Warme bird orespread, and sat still evermore,
    Till her inclos'd child kickt, and pick'd it selfe a dore.     180

XIX.

  Outcrept a sparrow, this soules moving Inne,
  On whose raw armes stiffe feathers now begin,
  As childrens teeth through gummes, to breake with paine,
  His flesh is jelly yet, and his bones threds,
  All a new downy mantle overspreads,                              185
  A mouth he opes, which would as much containe
  As his late house, and the first houre speaks plaine,
  And chirps alowd for meat. Meat fit for men
  His father steales for him, and so feeds then
    One, that within a moneth, will beate him from his hen.        190

XX.

  In this worlds youth wise nature did make hast,
  Things ripened sooner, and did longer last;
  Already this hot cocke, in bush and tree,
  In field and tent, oreflutters his next hen;
  He asks her not, who did so tast, nor when,                      195
  Nor if his sister, or his neece shee be;
  Nor doth she pule for his inconstancie
  If in her sight he change, nor doth refuse
  The next that calls; both liberty doe use;
    Where store is of both kindes, both kindes may freely chuse.   200


XXI.

  Men, till they tooke laws which made freedome lesse,
  Their daughters, and their sisters did ingresse;
  Till now unlawfull, therefore ill, 'twas not.
  So jolly, that it can move, this soule is,
  The body so free of his kindnesses,                              205
  That selfe-preserving it hath now forgot,
  And slackneth so the soules, and bodies knot,
  Which temperance streightens; freely on his she friends
  He blood, and spirit, pith, and marrow spends,
    Ill steward of himself, himselfe in three yeares ends.         210

XXII.

  Else might he long have liv'd; man did not know
  Of gummie blood, which doth in holly grow,
  How to make bird-lime, nor how to deceive
  With faind calls, hid nets, or enwrapping snare,
  The free inhabitants of the Plyant aire.                         215
  Man to beget, and woman to conceive
  Askt not of rootes, nor of cock-sparrowes, leave:
  Yet chuseth hee, though none of these he feares,
  Pleasantly three, then streightned twenty yeares
    To live, and to encrease his race, himselfe outweares.         220


XXIII.

  This cole with overblowing quench'd and dead,
  The Soule from her too active organs fled
  T'a brooke. A female fishes sandie Roe
  With the males jelly, newly lev'ned was,
  For they had intertouch'd as they did passe,                     225
  And one of those small bodies, fitted so,
  This soule inform'd, and abled it to rowe
  It selfe with finnie oares, which she did fit:
  Her scales seem'd yet of parchment, and as yet
    Perchance a fish, but by no name you could call it.            230


XXIV.

  When goodly, like a ship in her full trim,
  A swan, so white that you may unto him
  Compare all whitenesse, but himselfe to none,
  Glided along, and as he glided watch'd,
  And with his arched necke this poore fish catch'd.               235
  It mov'd with state, as if to looke upon
  Low things it scorn'd, and yet before that one
  Could thinke he sought it, he had swallowed cleare
  This, and much such, and unblam'd devour'd there
    All, but who too swift, too great, or well armed were.         240


XXV.

  Now swome a prison in a prison put,
  And now this Soule in double walls was shut,
  Till melted with the Swans digestive fire,
  She left her house the fish, and vapour'd forth;
  Fate not affording bodies of more worth                          245
  For her as yet, bids her againe retire
  T'another fish, to any new desire
  Made a new prey; For, he that can to none
  Resistance make, nor complaint, sure is gone.
    Weaknesse invites, but silence feasts oppression.              250


XXVI.

  Pace with her native streame, this fish doth keepe,
  And journeyes with her, towards the glassie deepe,
  But oft retarded, once with a hidden net
  Though with greate windowes, for when Need first taught
  These tricks to catch food, then they were not wrought           255
  As now, with curious greedinesse to let
  None scape, but few, and fit for use, to get,
  As, in this trap a ravenous pike was tane,
  Who, though himselfe distrest, would faine have slain
    This wretch; So hardly are ill habits left again.              260


XXVII.

  Here by her smallnesse shee two deaths orepast,
  Once innocence scap'd, and left the oppressor fast.
  The net through-swome, she keepes the liquid path,
  And whether she leape up sometimes to breath
  And suck in aire, or finde it underneath,                        265
  Or working parts like mills or limbecks hath
  To make the water thinne, and airelike faith
  Cares not; but safe the Place she's come unto
  Where fresh, with salt waves meet, and what to doe
    She knowes not, but betweene both makes a boord or two.        270


XXVIII.

  So farre from hiding her guests, water is,
  That she showes them in bigger quantities
  Then they are. Thus doubtfull of her way,
  For game and not for hunger a sea Pie
  Spied through this traiterous spectacle, from high,              275
  The seely fish where it disputing lay,
  And t'end her doubts and her, beares her away:
  Exalted she'is, but to the exalters good,
  As are by great ones, men which lowly stood.
    It's rais'd, to be the Raisers instrument and food.            280


XXIX.

  Is any kinde subject to rape like fish?
  Ill unto man, they neither doe, nor wish:
  Fishers they kill not, nor with noise awake,
  They doe not hunt, nor strive to make a prey
  Of beasts, nor their yong sonnes to beare away;                  285
  Foules they pursue not, nor do undertake
  To spoile the nests industrious birds do make;
  Yet them all these unkinde kinds feed upon,
  To kill them is an occupation,
    And lawes make Fasts, and Lents for their destruction.         290


XXX.

  A sudden stiffe land-winde in that selfe houre
  To sea-ward forc'd this bird, that did devour
  The fish; he cares not, for with ease he flies,
  Fat gluttonies best orator: at last
  So long hee hath flowen, and hath flowen so fast                 295
  That many leagues at sea, now tir'd hee lyes,
  And with his prey, that till then languisht, dies:
  The soules no longer foes, two wayes did erre,
  The fish I follow, and keepe no calender
    Of the other; he lives yet in some great officer.              300


XXXI.

  Into an embrion fish, our Soule is throwne,
  And in due time throwne out againe, and growne
  To such vastnesse as, if unmanacled
  From Greece, Morea were, and that by some
  Earthquake unrooted, loose Morea swome,                          305
  Or seas from Africks body had severed
  And torne the hopefull Promontories head,
  This fish would seeme these, and, when all hopes faile,
  A great ship overset, or without faile
    Hulling, might (when this was a whelp) be like this whale.     310


XXXII.

  At every stroake his brazen finnes do take,
  More circles in the broken sea they make
  Then cannons voices, when the aire they teare:
  His ribs are pillars, and his high arch'd roofe
  Of barke that blunts best steele, is thunder-proofe:             315
  Swimme in him swallow'd Dolphins, without feare,
  And feele no sides, as if his vast wombe were
  Some Inland sea, and ever as hee went
  Hee spouted rivers up, as if he ment
    To joyne our seas, with seas above the firmament.              320


XXXIII.

  He hunts not fish, but as an officer,
  Stayes in his court, at his owne net, and there
  All suitors of all sorts themselves enthrall;
  So on his backe lyes this whale wantoning,
  And in his gulfe-like throat, sucks every thing                  325
  That passeth neare. Fish chaseth fish, and all,
  Flyer and follower, in this whirlepoole fall;
  O might not states of more equality
  Consist? and is it of necessity
    That thousand guiltlesse smals, to make one great, must die?   330


XXXIV.

  Now drinkes he up seas, and he eates up flocks,
  He justles Ilands, and he shakes firme rockes.
  Now in a roomefull house this Soule doth float,
  And like a Prince she sends her faculties
  To all her limbes, distant as Provinces.                         335
  The Sunne hath twenty times both crab and goate
  Parched, since first lanch'd forth this living boate;
  'Tis greatest now, and to destruction
  Nearest; There's no pause at perfection;
    Greatnesse a period hath, but hath no station.                 340


XXXV.

  Two little fishes whom hee never harm'd,
  Nor fed on their kinde, two not throughly arm'd
  With hope that they could kill him, nor could doe
  Good to themselves by his death (they did not eate
  His flesh, nor suck those oyles, which thence outstreat)         345
  Conspir'd against him, and it might undoe
  The plot or all, that the plotters were two,
  But that they fishes were, and could not speake.
  How shall a Tyran wife strong projects breake,
    If wreches can on them the common anger wreake?                350


XXXVI.

  The flaile-finn'd Thresher, and steel-beak'd Sword-fish
  Onely attempt to doe, what all doe wish.
  The Thresher backs him, and to beate begins;
  The sluggard Whale yeelds to oppression,
  And t'hide himselfe from shame and danger, downe                 355
  Begins to sinke; the Swordfish upward spins,
  And gores him with his beake; his staffe-like finnes,
  So well the one, his sword the other plyes,
  That now a scoffe, and prey, this tyran dyes,
    And (his owne dole) feeds with himselfe all companies.         360


XXXVII.

  Who will revenge his death? or who will call
  Those to account, that thought, and wrought his fall?
  The heires of slaine kings, wee see are often so
  Transported with the joy of what they get,
  That they, revenge and obsequies forget,                         365
  Nor will against such men the people goe,
  Because h'is now dead, to whom they should show
  Love in that act; Some kings by vice being growne
  So needy of subjects love, that of their own
    They thinke they lose, if love be to the dead Prince shown.    370


XXXVIII.

  This Soule, now free from prison, and passion,
  Hath yet a little indignation
  That so small hammers should so soone downe beat
  So great a castle. And having for her house
  Got the streight cloyster of a wreched mouse                     375
  (As basest men that have not what to eate,
  Nor enjoy ought, doe farre more hate the great
  Then they, who good repos'd estates possesse)
  This Soule, late taught that great things might by lesse
    Be slain, to gallant mischiefe doth herselfe addresse.         380


XXXIX.

  Natures great master-peece, an Elephant,
  The onely harmlesse great thing; the giant
  Of beasts; who thought, no more had gone, to make one wise
  But to be just, and thankfull, loth to offend,
  (Yet nature hath given him no knees to bend)                     385
  Himselfe he up-props, on himselfe relies,
  And foe to none, suspects no enemies,
  Still sleeping stood; vex't not his fantasie
  Blacke dreames; like an unbent bow, carelesly
    His sinewy Proboscis did remisly lie:                          390


XL.

  In which as in a gallery this mouse
  Walk'd, and surveid the roomes of this vast house,
  And to the braine, the soules bedchamber, went,
  And gnaw'd the life cords there; Like a whole towne
  Cleane undermin'd, the slaine beast tumbled downe;               395
  With him the murtherer dies, whom envy sent
  To kill, not scape, (for, only hee that ment
  To die, did ever kill a man of better roome,)
  And thus he made his foe, his prey, and tombe:
    Who cares not to turn back, may any whither come.              400


XLI.

  Next, hous'd this Soule a Wolves yet unborne whelp,
  Till the best midwife, Nature, gave it helpe,
  To issue. It could kill, as soone as goe.
  Abel, as white, and milde as his sheepe were,
  (Who, in that trade, of Church, and kingdomes, there             405
  Was the first type) was still infested soe,
  With this wolfe, that it bred his losse and woe;
  And yet his bitch, his sentinell attends
  The flocke so neere, so well warnes and defends,
    That the wolfe, (hopelesse else) to corrupt her, intends.      410


XLII.

  Hee tooke a course, which since, succesfully,
  Great men have often taken, to espie
  The counsels, or to breake the plots of foes.
  To Abels tent he stealeth in the darke,
  On whose skirts the bitch slept; ere she could barke,            415
  Attach'd her with streight gripes, yet hee call'd those,
  Embracements of love; to loves worke he goes,
  Where deeds move more then words; nor doth she show,
  Nor <make> resist, nor needs hee streighten so
    His prey, for, were shee loose, she would nor barke, nor goe.  420


XLIII.

  Hee hath engag'd her; his, she wholy bides;
  Who not her owne, none others secrets hides.
  If to the flocke he come, and Abell there,
  She faines hoarse barkings, but she biteth not,
  Her faith is quite, but not her love forgot.                     425
  At last a trap, of which some every where
  Abell had plac'd, ends all his losse, and feare,
  By the Wolves death; and now just time it was
  That a quicke soule should give life to that masse
    Of blood in Abels bitch, and thither this did passe.           430


XLIV.

  Some have their wives, their sisters some begot,
  But in the lives of Emperours you shall not
  Reade of a lust the which may equall this;
  This wolfe begot himselfe, and finished
  What he began alive, when hee was dead;                          435
  Sonne to himselfe, and father too, hee is
  A ridling lust, for which Schoolemen would misse
  A proper name. The whelpe of both these lay
  In Abels tent, and with soft Moaba,
    His sister, being yong, it us'd to sport and play.             440


XLV.

  Hee soone for her too harsh, and churlish grew,
  And Abell (the dam dead) would use this new
  For the field. Being of two kindes thus made,
  He, as his dam, from sheepe drove wolves away,
  And as his Sire, he made them his owne prey.                     445
  Five yeares he liv'd, and cosened with his trade,
  Then hopelesse that his faults were hid, betraid
  Himselfe by flight, and by all followed,
  From dogges, a wolfe; from wolves, a dogge he fled;
    And, like a spie to both sides false, he perished.             450


XLVI.

  It quickned next a toyfull Ape, and so
  Gamesome it was, that it might freely goe
  From tent to tent, and with the children play.
  His organs now so like theirs hee doth finde,
  That why he cannot laugh, and speake his minde,                  455
  He wonders. Much with all, most he doth stay
  With Adams fift daughter _Siphatecia_,
  Doth gaze on her, and, where she passeth, passe,
  Gathers her fruits, and tumbles on the grasse,
    And wisest of that kinde, the first true lover was.            460


XLVII.

  He was the first that more desir'd to have
  One then another; first that ere did crave
  Love by mute signes, and had no power to speake;
  First that could make love faces, or could doe
  The valters sombersalts, or us'd to wooe                         465
  With hoiting gambolls, his owne bones to breake
  To make his mistresse merry; or to wreake
  Her anger on himselfe. Sinnes against kinde
  They easily doe, that can let feed their minde
    With outward beauty; beauty they in boyes and beasts do find   470


XLVIII.

  By this misled, too low things men have prov'd,
  And too high; beasts and angels have beene lov'd.
  This Ape, though else through-vaine, in this was wise,
  He reach'd at things too high, but open way
  There was, and he knew not she would say nay;                    475
  His toyes prevaile not, likelier meanes he tries,
  He gazeth on her face with teare-shot eyes,
  And up lifts subtly with his russet pawe
  Her kidskinne apron without feare or awe
    Of nature; nature hath no gaole, though shee hath law.         480


XLIX.

  First she was silly and knew not what he ment.
  That vertue, by his touches, chaft and spent,
  Succeeds an itchie warmth, that melts her quite;
  She knew not first, nowe cares not what he doth,
  And willing halfe and more, more then halfe <loth>,              485
  She neither puls nor pushes, but outright
  Now cries, and now repents; when _Tethlemite_
  Her brother, entred, and a great stone threw
  After the Ape, who, thus prevented, flew.
    This house thus batter'd downe, the Soule possest a new.       490


L.

  And whether by this change she lose or win,
  She comes out next, where the Ape would have gone in.
  _Adam_ and _Eve_ had mingled bloods, and now
  Like Chimiques equall fires, her temperate wombe
  Had stew'd and form'd it: and part did become                    495
  A spungie liver, that did richly allow,
  Like a free conduit, on a high hils brow,
  Life-keeping moisture unto every part;
  Part hardned it selfe to a thicker heart,
    Whose busie furnaces lifes spirits do impart.                  500


LI.

  Another part became the well of sense,
  The tender well-arm'd feeling braine, from whence,
  Those sinowie strings which do our bodies tie,
  Are raveld out; and fast there by one end,
  Did this Soule limbes, these limbes a soule attend;              505
  And now they joyn'd: keeping some quality
  Of every past shape, she knew treachery,
  Rapine, deceit, and lust, and ills enow
  To be a woman. _Themech_ she is now,
    Sister and wife to _Caine_, _Caine_ that first did plow.       510


LII.

  Who ere thou beest that read'st this sullen Writ,
  Which just so much courts thee, as thou dost it,
  Let me arrest thy thoughts; wonder with mee,
  Why plowing, building, ruling and the rest,
  Or most of those arts, whence our lives are blest,               515
  By cursed _Cains_ race invented be,
  And blest _Seth_ vext us with Astronomie.
  Ther's nothing simply good, nor ill alone,
  Of every quality comparison,
    The onely measure is, and judge, opinion.                      520


_The end of the Progresse of the Soule._





DIVINE POEMS.

To _E._ of _D._ with six holy Sonnets.


  See Sir, how as the Suns hot Masculine flame
    Begets strange creatures on Niles durty slime,
    In me, your fatherly yet lusty Ryme
  (For, these songs are their fruits) have wrought the same;
  But though the ingendring force from whence they came              5
    Bee strong enough, and nature doe admit
    Seaven to be borne at once, I send as yet
  But six; they say, the seaventh hath still some maime.
    I choose your judgement, which the same degree
    Doth with her sister, your invention, hold,                     10
  As fire these drossie Rymes to purifie,
    Or as Elixar, to change them to gold;
  You are that Alchimist which alwaies had
  Wit, whose one spark could make good things of bad.






_To the Lady Magdalen Herbert: of St. Mary Magdalen._

  Her of your name, whose fair inheritance
    Bethina was, and jointure Magdalo:
  An active faith so highly did advance,
    That she once knew, more than the Church did know,
  The Resurrection; so much good there is                            5
    Deliver'd of her, that some Fathers be
  Loth to believe one Woman could do this;
    But, think these Magdalens were two or three.
  Increase their number, Lady, and their fame:
    To their Devotion, add your Innocence;                          10
  Take so much of th'example, as of the name;
    The latter half; and in some recompence
  That they did harbour Christ himself, a Guest,
    Harbour these Hymns, to his dear name addrest.

  J.D.



HOLY SONNETS.


_La Corona._

  1. _Deigne at my hands this crown of prayer and praise_,
  Weav'd in my low devout melancholie,
  Thou which of good, hast, yea art treasury,
  All changing unchang'd Antient of dayes;
  But doe not, with a vile crowne of fraile bayes,                   5
  Reward my muses white sincerity,
  But what thy thorny crowne gain'd, that give mee,
  A crowne of Glory, which doth flower alwayes;
  The ends crowne our workes, but thou crown'st our ends,
  For, at our end begins our endlesse rest;                         10
  The first last end, now zealously possest,
  With a strong sober thirst, my soule attends.
  'Tis time that heart and voice be lifted high,
  _Salvation to all that will is nigh_.




ANNVNCIATION.

  2. _Salvation to all that will is nigh_;
  That All, which alwayes is All every where,
  Which cannot sinne, and yet all sinnes must beare,
  Which cannot die, yet cannot chuse but die,
  Loe, faithfull Virgin, yeelds himselfe to lye                      5
  In prison, in thy wombe; and though he there
  Can take no sinne, nor thou give, yet he'will weare
  Taken from thence, flesh, which deaths force may trie.
  Ere by the spheares time was created, thou
  Wast in his minde, who is thy Sonne, and Brother;                 10
  Whom thou conceiv'st, conceiv'd; yea thou art now
  Thy Makers maker, and thy Fathers mother;
  Thou'hast light in darke; and shutst in little roome,
  _Immensity cloysterd in thy deare wombe_.



NATIVITIE.

  3. _Immensitie cloysterd in thy deare wombe_,
  Now leaves his welbelov'd imprisonment,
  There he hath made himselfe to his intent
  Weake enough, now into our world to come;
  But Oh, for thee, for him, hath th'Inne no roome?                  5
  Yet lay him in this stall, and from the Orient,
  Starres, and wisemen will travell to prevent
  Th'effect of _Herods_ jealous generall doome.
  Seest thou, my Soule, with thy faiths eyes, how he
  Which fils all place, yet none holds him, doth lye?               10
  Was not his pity towards thee wondrous high,
  That would have need to be pittied by thee?
  Kisse him, and with him into Egypt goe,
  _With his kinde mother, who partakes thy woe_.



TEMPLE.

  4. _With his kinde mother who partakes thy woe_,
  _Ioseph_ turne backe; see where your child doth sit,
  Blowing, yea blowing out those sparks of wit,
  Which himselfe on the Doctors did bestow;
  The Word but lately could not speake, and loe,                     5
  It sodenly speakes wonders, whence comes it,
  That all which was, and all which should be writ,
  A shallow seeming child, should deeply know?
  His Godhead was not soule to his manhood,
  Nor had time mellowed him to this ripenesse,                      10
  But as for one which hath a long taske, 'tis good,
  With the Sunne to beginne his businesse,
  He in his ages morning thus began
  _By miracles exceeding power of man_.



CRVCIFYING.

  5. _By miracles exceeding power of man_,
  Hee faith in some, envie in some begat,
  For, what weake spirits admire, ambitious, hate;
  In both affections many to him ran,
  But Oh! the worst are most, they will and can,                     5
  Alas, and do, unto the immaculate,
  Whose creature Fate is, now prescribe a Fate,
  Measuring selfe-lifes infinity to'a span,
  Nay to an inch. Loe, where condemned hee
  Beares his owne crosse, with paine, yet by and by                 10
  When it beares him, he must beare more and die.
  Now thou art lifted up, draw mee to thee,
  And at thy death giving such liberall dole,
  _Moyst, with one drop of thy blood, my dry soule_.



RESVRRECTION.

  6. _Moyst with one drop of thy blood, my dry soule_
  Shall (though she now be in extreme degree
  Too stony hard, and yet too fleshly,) bee
  Freed by that drop, from being starv'd, hard, or foule,
  And life, by this death abled, shall controule                     5
  Death, whom thy death slue; nor shall to mee
  Feare of first or last death, bring miserie,
  If in thy little booke my name thou enroule,
  Flesh in that long sleep is not putrified,
  But made that there, of which, and for which 'twas;               10
  Nor can by other meanes be glorified.
  May then sinnes sleep, and deaths soone from me passe,
  That wak't from both, I againe risen may
  _Salute the last, and everlasting day_.



ASCENTION.

  7. _Salute the last and everlasting day_,
  Joy at the uprising of this Sunne, and Sonne,
  Yee whose just teares, or tribulation
  Have purely washt, or burnt your drossie clay;
  Behold the Highest, parting hence away,                            5
  Lightens the darke clouds, which hee treads upon,
  Nor doth hee by ascending, show alone,
  But first hee, and hee first enters the way.
  O strong Ramme, which hast batter'd heaven for mee,
  Mild Lambe, which with thy blood, hast mark'd the path;           10
  Bright Torch, which shin'st, that I the way may see,
  Oh, with thy owne blood quench thy owne just wrath,
  And if thy holy Spirit, my Muse did raise,
  _Deigne at my hands this crowne of prayer and praise_.



_Holy Sonnets._

I.

  Thou hast made me, And shall thy worke decay?
  Repaire me now, for now mine end doth haste,
  I runne to death, and death meets me as fast,
  And all my pleasures are like yesterday;
  I dare not move my dimme eyes any way,                             5
  Despaire behind, and death before doth cast
  Such terrour, and my feeble flesh doth waste
  By sinne in it, which it t'wards hell doth weigh;
  Onely thou art above, and when towards thee
  By thy leave I can looke, I rise againe;                          10
  But our old subtle foe so tempteth me,
  That not one houre my selfe I can sustaine;
  Thy Grace may wing me to prevent his art,
  And thou like Adamant draw mine iron heart.




II.

  As due by many titles I resigne
  My selfe to thee, O God, first I was made
  By thee, and for thee, and when I was decay'd
  Thy blood bought that, the which before was thine;
  I am thy sonne, made with thy selfe to shine,                      5
  Thy servant, whose paines thou hast still repaid,
  Thy sheepe, thine Image, and, till I betray'd
  My selfe, a temple of thy Spirit divine;
  Why doth the devill then usurpe on mee?
  Why doth he steale, nay ravish that's thy right?                  10
  Except thou rise and for thine owne worke fight,
  Oh I shall soone despaire, when I doe see
  That thou lov'st mankind well, yet wilt'not chuse me,
  And Satan hates mee, yet is loth to lose mee.





III.

  O might those sighes and teares returne againe
  Into my breast and eyes, which I have spent,
  That I might in this holy discontent
  Mourne with some fruit, as I have mourn'd in vaine;
  In mine Idolatry what showres of raine                             5
  Mine eyes did waste? what griefs my heart did rent?
  That sufferance was my sinne; now I repent;
  'Cause I did suffer I must suffer paine.
  Th'hydroptique drunkard, and night-scouting thiefe,
  The itchy Lecher, and selfe tickling proud                        10
  Have the remembrance of past joyes, for reliefe
  Of comming ills. To (poore) me is allow'd
  No ease; for, long, yet vehement griefe hath beene
  Th'effect and cause, the punishment and sinne.



IV.

  Oh my blacke Soule! now thou art summoned
  By sicknesse, deaths herald, and champion;
  Thou art like a pilgrim, which abroad hath done
  Treason, and durst not turne to whence hee is fled,
  Or like a thiefe, which till deaths doome be read,                 5
  Wisheth himselfe delivered from prison;
  But damn'd and hal'd to execution,
  Wisheth that still he might be imprisoned.
  Yet grace, if thou repent, thou canst not lacke;
  But who shall give thee that grace to beginne?                    10
  Oh make thy selfe with holy mourning blacke,
  And red with blushing, as thou art with sinne;
  Or wash thee in Christs blood, which hath this might
  That being red, it dyes red soules to white.



V.

  I am a little world made cunningly
  Of Elements, and an Angelike spright,
  But black sinne hath betraid to endlesse night
  My worlds both parts, and (oh) both parts must die.
  You which beyond that heaven which was most high                   5
  Have found new sphears, and of new lands can write,
  Powre new seas in mine eyes, that so I might
  Drowne my world with my weeping earnestly,
  Or wash it, if it must be drown'd no more:
  But oh it must be burnt! alas the fire                            10
  Of lust and envie have burnt it heretofore,
  And made it fouler; Let their flames retire,
  And burne me ô Lord, with a fiery zeale
  Of thee and thy house, which doth in eating heale.



VI.

  This is my playes last scene, here heavens appoint
  My pilgrimages last mile; and my race
  Idly, yet quickly runne, hath this last pace,
  My spans last inch, my minutes latest point,
  And gluttonous death, will instantly unjoynt                       5
  My body, and soule, and I shall sleepe a space,
  But my'ever-waking part shall see that face,
  Whose feare already shakes my every joynt:
  Then, as my soule, to'heaven her first seate, takes flight,
  And earth-borne body, in the earth shall dwell,                   10
  So, fall my sinnes, that all may have their right,
  To where they'are bred, and would presse me, to hell.
  Impute me righteous, thus purg'd of evill,
  For thus I leave the world, the flesh, the devill.




VII.

  At the round earths imagin'd corners, blow
  Your trumpets, Angells, and arise, arise
  From death, you numberlesse infinities
  Of soules, and to your scattred bodies goe,
  All whom the flood did, and fire shall o'erthrow,                  5
  All whom warre, dearth, age, agues, tyrannies,
  Despaire, law, chance, hath slaine, and you whose eyes,
  Shall behold God, and never tast deaths woe.
  But let them sleepe, Lord, and mee mourne a space,
  For, if above all these, my sinnes abound,                        10
  'Tis late to aske abundance of thy grace,
  When wee are there; here on this lowly ground,
  Teach mee how to repent; for that's as good
  As if thou'hadst seal'd my pardon, with thy blood.


VIII.

  If faithfull soules be alike glorifi'd
  As Angels, then my fathers soule doth see,
  And adds this even to full felicitie,
  That valiantly I hels wide mouth o'rstride:
  But if our mindes to these soules be descry'd                      5
  By circumstances, and by signes that be
  Apparent in us, not immediately,
  How shall my mindes white truth by them be try'd?
  They see idolatrous lovers weepe and mourne,
  And vile blasphemous Conjurers to call                            10
  On Iefus name, and Pharisaicall
  Dissemblers feigne devotion. Then turne
  O pensive soule, to God, for he knowes best
  Thy true griefe, for he put it in my breast.




IX.

  If poysonous mineralls, and if that tree,
  Whose fruit threw death on else immortall us,
  If lecherous goats, if serpents envious
  Cannot be damn'd; Alas; why should I bee?
  Why should intent or reason, borne in mee,                         5
  Make sinnes, else equall, in mee more heinous?
  And mercy being easie, and glorious
  To God; in his sterne wrath, why threatens hee?
  But who am I, that dare dispute with thee
  O God? Oh! of thine onely worthy blood,                           10
  And my teares, make a heavenly Lethean flood,
  And drowne in it my sinnes blacke memorie;
  That thou remember them, some claime as debt,
  I thinke it mercy, if thou wilt forget.




X.

  Death be not proud, though some have called thee
  Mighty and dreadfull, for, thou art not soe,
  For, those, whom thou think'st, thou dost overthrow,
  Die not, poore death, nor yet canst thou kill mee.
  From rest and sleepe, which but thy pictures bee,                  5
  Much pleasure, then from thee, much more must flow,
  And soonest our best men with thee doe goe,
  Rest of their bones, and soules deliverie.
  Thou art slave to Fate, Chance, kings, and desperate men,
  And dost with poyson, warre, and sicknesse dwell,                 10
  And poppie, or charmes can make us sleepe as well,
  And better then thy stroake; why swell'st thou then?
  One short sleepe past, wee wake eternally,
  And death shall be no more; death, thou shalt die.



XI.

  Spit in my face you Jewes, and pierce my side,
  Buffet, and scoffe, scourge, and crucifie mee,
  For I have sinn'd, and sinn'd, and onely hee,
  Who could do no iniquitie, hath dyed:
  But by my death can not be satisfied                               5
  My sinnes, which passe the Jewes impiety:
  They kill'd once an inglorious man, but I
  Crucifie him daily, being now glorified.
  Oh let mee then, his strange love still admire:
  Kings pardon, but he bore our punishment.                         10
  And _Iacob_ came cloth'd in vile harsh attire
  But to supplant, and with gainfull intent:
  God cloth'd himselfe in vile mans flesh, that so
  Hee might be weake enough to suffer woe.




XII.

  Why are wee by all creatures waited on?
  Why doe the prodigall elements supply
  Life and food to mee, being more pure then I,
  Simple, and further from corruption?
  Why brook'st thou, ignorant horse, subjection?                     5
  Why dost thou bull, and bore so seelily
  Dissemble weaknesse, and by'one mans stroke die,
  Whose whole kinde, you might swallow and feed upon?
  Weaker I am, woe is mee, and worse then you,
  You have not sinn'd, nor need be timorous.                        10
  But wonder at a greater wonder, for to us
  Created nature doth these things subdue,
  But their Creator, whom sin, nor nature tyed,
  For us, his Creatures, and his foes, hath dyed.




XIII.

  What if this present were the worlds last night?
  Marke in my heart, O Soule, where thou dost dwell,
  The picture of Christ crucified, and tell
  Whether that countenance can thee affright,
  Teares in his eyes quench the amasing light,                       5
  Blood fills his frownes, which from his pierc'd head fell.
  And can that tongue adjudge thee unto hell,
  Which pray'd forgivenesse for his foes fierce spight?
  No, no; but as in my idolatrie
  I said to all my profane mistresses,                              10
  Beauty, of pitty, foulnesse onely is
  A signe of rigour: so I say to thee,
  To wicked spirits are horrid shapes assign'd,
  This beauteous forme assures a pitious minde.



XIV.

  Batter my heart, three person'd God; for, you
  As yet but knocke, breathe, shine, and seeke to mend;
  That I may rise, and stand, o'erthrow mee,'and bend
  Your force, to breake, blowe, burn and make me new.
  I, like an usurpt towne, to'another due,                           5
  Labour to'admit you, but Oh, to no end,
  Reason your viceroy in mee, mee should defend,
  But is captiv'd, and proves weake or untrue.
  Yet dearely'I love you,'and would be loved faine,
  But am betroth'd unto your enemie:                                10
  Divorce mee,'untie, or breake that knot againe,
  Take mee to you, imprison mee, for I
  Except you'enthrall mee, never shall be free,
  Nor ever chast, except you ravish mee.



XV.

  Wilt thou love God, as he thee! then digest,
  My Soule, this wholsome meditation,
  How God the Spirit, by Angels waited on
  In heaven, doth make his Temple in thy brest.
  The Father having begot a Sonne most blest,                        5
  And still begetting, (for he ne'r begonne)
  Hath deign'd to chuse thee by adoption,
  Coheire to'his glory,'and Sabbaths endlesse rest.
  And as a robb'd man, which by search doth finde
  His stolne stuffe sold, must lose or buy'it againe:               10
  The Sonne of glory came downe, and was slaine,
  Us whom he'had made, and Satan stolne, to unbinde.
  'Twas much, that man was made like God before,
  But, that God should be made like man, much more.




XVI.

  Father, part of his double interest
  Unto thy kingdome, thy Sonne gives to mee,
  His joynture in the knottie Trinitie
  Hee keepes, and gives to me his deaths conquest.
  This Lambe, whose death, with life the world hath blest,           5
  Was from the worlds beginning slaine, and he
  Hath made two Wills, which with the Legacie
  Of his and thy kingdome, doe thy Sonnes invest.
  Yet such are thy laws, that men argue yet
  Whether a man those statutes can fulfill;                         10
  None doth; but all-healing grace and spirit
  Revive againe what law and letter kill.
  Thy lawes abridgement, and thy last command
  Is all but love; Oh let this last Will stand!



XVII.

  Since she whom I lov'd hath payd her last debt
  To Nature, and to hers, and my good is dead,
  And her Soule early into heaven ravished,
  Wholly on heavenly things my mind is sett.
  Here the admyring her my mind did whett                            5
  To seeke thee God; so streames do shew their head;
  But though I have found thee, and thou my thirst hast fed,
  A holy thirsty dropsy melts mee yett.
  But why should I begg more Love, when as thou
  Dost wooe my soule for hers; offring all thine:                   10
  And dost not only feare least I allow
  My Love to Saints and Angels things divine,
  But in thy tender jealosy dost doubt
  Least the World, Fleshe, yea Devill putt thee out.



XVIII.

  Show me deare Christ, thy spouse, so bright and clear.
  What! is it She, which on the other shore
  Goes richly painted? or which rob'd and tore
  Laments and mournes in Germany and here?
  Sleepes she a thousand, then peepes up one yeare?                  5
  Is she selfe truth and errs? now new, now outwore?
  Doth she, and did she, and shall she evermore
  On one, on seaven, or on no hill appeare?
  Dwells she with us, or like adventuring knights
  First travaile we to seeke and then make Love?                    10
  Betray kind husband thy spouse to our sights,
  And let myne amorous soule court thy mild Dove,
  Who is most trew, and pleasing to thee, then
  When she'is embrac'd and open to most men.




XIX.

  Oh, to vex me, contraryes meet in one:
  Inconstancy unnaturally hath begott
  A constant habit; that when I would not
  I change in vowes, and in devotione.
  As humorous is my contritione                                      5
  As my prophane Love, and as soone forgott:
  As ridlingly distemper'd, cold and hott,
  As praying, as mute; as infinite, as none.
  I durst not view heaven yesterday; and to day
  In prayers, and flattering speaches I court God:                  10
  To morrow I quake with true feare of his rod.
  So my devout fitts come and go away
  Like a fantastique Ague: save that here
  Those are my best dayes, when I shake with feare.



_The Crosse._

  Since Christ embrac'd the Crosse it selfe, dare I
  His image, th'image of his Crosse deny?
  Would I have profit by the sacrifice,
  And dare the chosen Altar to despise?
  It bore all other sinnes, but is it fit                            5
  That it should beare the sinne of scorning it?
  Who from the picture would avert his eye,
  How would he flye his paines, who there did dye?
  From mee, no Pulpit, nor misgrounded law,
  Nor scandall taken, shall this Crosse withdraw,                   10
  It shall not, for it cannot; for, the losse
  Of this Crosse, were to mee another Crosse;
  Better were worse, for, no affiction,
  No Crosse is so extreme, as to have none.
  Who can blot out the Crosse, which th'instrument                  15
  Of God, dew'd on mee in the Sacrament?
  Who can deny mee power, and liberty
  To stretch mine armes, and mine owne Crosse to be?
  Swimme, and at every stroake, thou art thy Crosse;
  The Mast and yard make one, where seas do tosse;                  20
  Looke downe, thou spiest out Crosses in small things;
  Looke up, thou seest birds rais'd on crossed wings;
  All the Globes frame, and spheares, is nothing else
  But the Meridians crossing Parallels.
  Materiall Crosses then, good physicke bee,                        25
  But yet spirituall have chiefe dignity.
  These for extracted chimique medicine serve,
  And cure much better, and as well preserve;
  Then are you your own physicke, or need none,
  When Still'd, or purg'd by tribulation.                           30
  For when that Crosse ungrudg'd, unto you stickes,
  Then are you to your selfe, a Crucifixe.
  As perchance, Carvers do not faces make,
  But that away, which hid them there, do take;
  Let Crosses, soe, take what hid Christ in thee,                   35
  And be his image, or not his, but hee.
  But, as oft Alchimists doe coyners prove,
  So may a selfe-dispising, get selfe-love,
  And then as worst surfets, of best meates bee,
  Soe is pride, issued from humility,                               40
  For, 'tis no child, but monster; therefore Crosse
  Your joy in crosses, else, 'tis double losse.
  And crosse thy senses, else, both they, and thou
  Must perish soone, and to destruction bowe.
  For if the'eye seeke good objects, and will take                  45
  No crosse from bad, wee cannot scape a snake.
  So with harsh, hard, sowre, stinking, crosse the rest,
  Make them indifferent all; call nothing best.
  But most the eye needs crossing, that can rome,
  And move; To th'other th'objects must come home.                  50
  And crosse thy heart: for that in man alone
  Points downewards, and hath palpitation.
  Crosse those dejections, when it downeward tends,
  And when it to forbidden heights pretends.
  And as the braine through bony walls doth vent                    55
  By sutures, which a Crosses forme present,
  So when thy braine workes, ere thou utter it,
  Crosse and correct concupiscence of witt.
  Be covetous of Crosses, let none fall.
  Crosse no man else, but crosse thy selfe in all.                  60
  Then doth the Crosse of Christ worke fruitfully
  Within our hearts, when wee love harmlesly
  That Crosses pictures much, and with more care
  That Crosses children, which our Crosses are.




_Resurrection, imperfect._

  Sleep sleep old Sun, thou canst not have repast
  As yet, the wound thou took'st on friday last;
  Sleepe then, and rest; The world may beare thy stay,
  A better Sun rose before thee to day,
  Who, not content to'enlighten all that dwell                       5
  On the earths face, as thou, enlightned hell,
  And made the darke fires languish in that vale,
  As, at thy presence here, our fires grow pale.
  Whose body having walk'd on earth, and now
  Hasting to Heaven, would, that he might allow                     10
  Himselfe unto all stations, and fill all,
  For these three daies become a minerall;
  Hee was all gold when he lay downe, but rose
  All tincture, and doth not alone dispose
  Leaden and iron wills to good, but is                             15
  Of power to make even sinfull flesh like his.
  Had one of those, whose credulous pietie
  Thought, that a Soule one might discerne and see
  Goe from a body,'at this sepulcher been,
  And, issuing from the sheet, this body seen,                      20
  He would have justly thought this body a soule,
  If not of any man, yet of the whole.
                      _Desunt cætera._





_The Annuntiation and Passion._

  Tamely, fraile body,'abstaine to day; to day
  My soule eates twice, Christ hither and away.
  She sees him man, so like God made in this,
  That of them both a circle embleme is,
  Whose first and last concurre; this doubtfull day                  5
  Of feast or fast, Christ came, and went away.
  Shee sees him nothing twice at once, who'is all;
  Shee sees a Cedar plant it selfe, and fall,
  Her Maker put to making, and the head
  Of life, at once, not yet alive, yet dead.                        10
  She sees at once the virgin mother stay
  Reclus'd at home, Publique at Golgotha;
  Sad and rejoyc'd shee's seen at once, and seen
  At almost fiftie, and at scarce fifteene.
  At once a Sonne is promis'd her, and gone,                        15
  Gabriell gives Christ to her, He her to John;
  Not fully a mother, Shee's in Orbitie,
  At once receiver and the legacie.
  All this, and all betweene, this day hath showne,
  Th'Abridgement of Christs story, which makes one                  20
  (As in plaine Maps, the furthest West is East)
  Of the'Angels _Ave_,'and _Consummatum est_.
  How well the Church, Gods Court of faculties
  Deales, in some times, and seldome joyning these!
  As by the selfe-fix'd Pole wee never doe                          25
  Direct our course, but the next starre thereto,
  Which showes where the'other is, and which we say
  (Because it strayes not farre) doth never stray;
  So God by his Church, neerest to him, wee know,
  And stand firme, if wee by her motion goe;                        30
  His Spirit, as his fiery Pillar doth
  Leade, and his Church, as cloud; to one end both.
  This Church, by letting these daies joyne, hath shown
  Death and conception in mankinde is one;
  Or'twas in him the same humility,                                 35
  That he would be a man, and leave to be:
  Or as creation he hath made, as God,
  With the last judgement, but one period,
  His imitating Spouse would joyne in one
  Manhoods extremes: He shall come, he is gone:                     40
  Or as though one blood drop, which thence did fall,
  Accepted, would have serv'd, he yet shed all;
  So though the least of his paines, deeds, or words,
  Would busie a life, she all this day affords;
  This treasure then, in grosse, my Soule uplay,                    45
  And in my life retaile it every day.



_Goodfriday_, 1613. _Riding Westward._

  Let mans Soule be a Spheare, and then, in this,
  The intelligence that moves, devotion is,
  And as the other Spheares, by being growne
  Subject to forraigne motions, lose their owne,
  And being by others hurried every day,                             5
  Scarce in a yeare their naturall forme obey:
  Pleasure or businesse, so, our Soules admit
  For their first mover, and are whirld by it.
  Hence is't, that I am carryed towards the West
  This day, when my Soules forme bends toward the East.             10
  There I should see a Sunne, by rising set,
  And by that setting endlesse day beget;
  But that Christ on this Crosse, did rise and fall,
  Sinne had eternally benighted all.
  Yet dare I'almost be glad, I do not see                           15
  That spectacle of too much weight for mee.
  Who sees Gods face, that is selfe life, must dye;
  What a death were it then to see God dye?
  It made his owne Lieutenant Nature shrinke,
  It made his footstoole crack, and the Sunne winke.                20
  Could I behold those hands which span the Poles,
  And turne all spheares at once, peirc'd with those holes?
  Could I behold that endlesse height which is
  Zenith to us, and our Antipodes,
  Humbled below us? or that blood which is                          25
  The seat of all our Soules, if not of his,
  Made durt of dust, or that flesh which was worne
  By God, for his apparell, rag'd, and torne?
  If on these things I durst not looke, durst I
  Upon his miserable mother cast mine eye,                          30
  Who was Gods partner here, and furnish'd thus
  Halfe of that Sacrifice, which ransom'd us?
  Though these things, as I ride, be from mine eye,
  They'are present yet unto my memory,
  For that looks towards them; and thou look'st towards mee,        35
  O Saviour, as thou hang'st upon the tree;
  I turne my backe to thee, but to receive
  Corrections, till thy mercies bid thee leave.
  O thinke mee worth thine anger, punish mee,
  Burne off my rusts, and my deformity,                             40
  Restore thine Image, so much, by thy grace,
  That thou may'st know mee, and I'll turne my face.



THE LITANIE.


I.

_The_ FATHER.

    Father of Heaven, and him, by whom
  It, and us for it, and all else, for us
    Thou madest, and govern'st ever, come
  And re-create mee, now growne ruinous:
        My heart is by dejection, clay,                              5
        And by selfe-murder, red.
  From this red earth, O Father, purge away
  All vicious tinctures, that new fashioned
  I may rise up from death, before I'am dead.


II.

_The_ SONNE.

    O Sonne of God, who seeing two things,                          10
  Sinne, and death crept in, which were never made,
    By bearing one, tryed'st with what stings
  The other could thine heritage invade;
        O be thou nail'd unto my heart,
        And crucified againe,                                       15
  Part not from it, though it from thee would part,
  But let it be, by applying so thy paine,
  Drown'd in thy blood, and in thy passion slaine.


III.

_The_ HOLY GHOST.

    O Holy Ghost, whose temple I
  Am, but of mudde walls, and condensed dust,                       20
    And being sacrilegiously
  Halfe wasted with youths fires, of pride and lust,
        Must with new stormes be weatherbeat;
        Double in my heart thy flame,
  Which let devout sad teares intend; and let                       25
  (Though this glasse lanthorne, flesh, do suffer maime)
  Fire, Sacrifice, Priest, Altar be the same.


IV.

_The_ TRINITY.

    O Blessed glorious Trinity,
  Bones to Philosophy, but milke to faith,
    Which, as wise serpents, diversly                               30
  Most slipperinesse, yet most entanglings hath,
        As you distinguish'd undistinct
        By power, love, knowledge bee,
  Give mee a such selfe different instinct
  Of these; let all mee elemented bee,                              35
  Of power, to love, to know, you unnumbred three.


V.

_The Virgin_ MARY.

    For that faire blessed Mother-maid,
  Whose flesh redeem'd us; That she-Cherubin,
    Which unlock'd Paradise, and made
  One claime for innocence, and disseiz'd sinne,                    40
        Whose wombe was a strange heav'n, for there
        God cloath'd himselfe, and grew,
  Our zealous thankes wee poure. As her deeds were
  Our helpes, so are her prayers; nor can she sue
  In vaine, who hath such titles unto you.                          45


VI.

_The Angels._

    And since this life our nonage is,
  And wee in Wardship to thine Angels be,
    Native in heavens faire Palaces,
  Where we shall be but denizen'd by thee,
        As th'earth conceiving by the Sunne,                        50
        Yeelds faire diversitie,
  Yet never knowes which course that light doth run,
  So let mee study, that mine actions bee
  Worthy their sight, though blinde in how they see.


VII.

_The Patriarches._

    And let thy Patriarches Desire                                  55
  (Those great Grandfathers of thy Church, which saw
    More in the cloud, then wee in fire,
  Whom Nature clear'd more, then us Grace and Law,
        And now in Heaven still pray, that wee
        May use our new helpes right,)                              60
  Be satisfy'd, and fructifie in mee;
  Let not my minde be blinder by more light
  Nor Faith, by Reason added, lose her sight.


VIII.

_The Prophets._

    Thy Eagle-sighted Prophets too,
  Which were thy Churches Organs, and did sound                     65
    That harmony, which made of two
  One law, and did unite, but not confound;
        Those heavenly Poëts which did see
        Thy will, and it expresse
  In rythmique feet, in common pray for mee,                        70
  That I by them excuse not my excesse
  In seeking secrets, or Poëtiquenesse.


IX.

_The Apostles._

    And thy illustrious Zodiacke
  Of twelve Apostles, which ingirt this All,
    (From whom whosoever do not take                                75
  Their light, to darke deep pits, throw downe, and fall,)
        As through their prayers, thou'hast let mee know
        That their bookes are divine;
  May they pray still, and be heard, that I goe
  Th'old broad way in applying; O decline                           80
  Mee, when my comment would make thy word mine.


X.

_The Martyrs._

    And since thou so desirously
  Did'st long to die, that long before thou could'st,
    And long since thou no more couldst dye,
  Thou in thy scatter'd mystique body wouldst                       85
        In Abel dye, and ever since
        In thine; let their blood come
  To begge for us, a discreet patience
  Of death, or of worse life: for Oh, to some
  Not to be Martyrs, is a martyrdome.                               90


XI.

_The Confessors._

    Therefore with thee triumpheth there
  A Virgin Squadron of white Confessors,
    Whose bloods betroth'd, not marryed were,
  Tender'd, not taken by those Ravishers:
        They know, and pray, that wee may know,                     95
        In every Christian
  Hourly tempestuous persecutions grow;
  Tentations martyr us alive; A man
  Is to himselfe a Dioclesian.


XII.

_The Virgins._

    The cold white snowie Nunnery,                                 100
  Which, as thy mother, their high Abbesse, sent
    Their bodies backe againe to thee,
  As thou hadst lent them, cleane and innocent,
        Though they have not obtain'd of thee,
        That or thy Church, or I,                                  105
  Should keep, as they, our first integrity;
  Divorce thou sinne in us, or bid it die,
  And call chast widowhead Virginitie.


XIII.

_The Doctors._

    Thy sacred Academic above
  Of Doctors, whose paines have unclasp'd, and taught              110
    Both bookes of life to us (for love
  To know thy Scriptures tells us, we are wrote
        In thy other booke) pray for us there
        That what they have misdone
  Or mis-said, wee to that may not adhere;                         115
  Their zeale may be our sinne. Lord let us runne
  Meane waies, and call them stars, but not the Sunne.


XIV.

    And whil'st this universall Quire,
  That Church in triumph, this in warfare here,
    Warm'd with one all-partaking fire                             120
  Of love, that none be lost, which cost thee deare,
        Prayes ceaslesly,'and thou hearken too,
        (Since to be gratious
  Our taske is treble, to pray, beare, and doe)
  Heare this prayer Lord: O Lord deliver us                        125
  From trusting in those prayers, though powr'd out thus.


XV.

    From being anxious, or secure,
  Dead clods of sadnesse, or light squibs of mirth,
    From thinking, that great courts immure
  All, or no happinesse, or that this earth                        130
        Is only for our prison fram'd,
        Or that thou art covetous
  To them whom thou lovest, or that they are maim'd
  From reaching this worlds sweet, who seek thee thus,
  With all their might, Good Lord deliver us.                      135


XVI.

    From needing danger, to bee good,
  From owing thee yesterdaies teares to day,
    From trusting so much to thy blood,
  That in that hope, wee wound our soule away,
        From bribing thee with Almes, to excuse                    140
        Some sinne more burdenous,
  From light affecting, in religion, newes,
  From thinking us all soule, neglecting thus
  Our mutuall duties, Lord deliver us.


XVII.

    From tempting Satan to tempt us,                               145
  By our connivence, or slack companie,
    From measuring ill by vitious,
  Neglecting to choake sins spawne, Vanitie,
        From indiscreet humilitie,
        Which might be scandalous,                                 150
  And cast reproach on Christianitie,
  From being spies, or to spies pervious,
  From thirst, or scorne of fame, deliver us.


XVIII.

    Deliver us for thy descent
  Into the Virgin, whose wombe was a place                         155
    Of middle kind; and thou being sent
  To'ungratious us, staid'st at her full of grace;
        And through thy poore birth, where first thou
        Glorifiedst Povertie,
  And yet soone after riches didst allow,                          160
  By accepting Kings gifts in the Epiphanie,
  Deliver, and make us, to both waies free.


XIX.

    And through that bitter agonie,
  Which is still the agonie of pious wits,
    Disputing what distorted thee,                                 165
  And interrupted evennesse, with fits;
        And through thy free confession
        Though thereby they were then
  Made blind, so that thou might'st from them have gone,
  Good Lord deliver us, and teach us when                          170
  Wee may not, and we may blinde unjust men.


XX.

    Through thy submitting all, to blowes
  Thy face, thy clothes to spoile; thy fame to scorne,
    All waies, which rage, or Justice knowes,
  And by which thou could'st shew, that thou wast born;            175
        And through thy gallant humblenesse
        Which thou in death did'st shew,
  Dying before thy soule they could expresse,
  Deliver us from death, by dying so,
  To this world, ere this world doe bid us goe.                    180


XXI.

    When senses, which thy souldiers are,
  Wee arme against thee, and they fight for sinne,
    When want, sent but to tame, doth warre
  And worke despaire a breach to enter in,
        When plenty, Gods image, and seale                         185
        Makes us Idolatrous,
  And love it, not him, whom it should reveale,
  When wee are mov'd to seeme religious
  Only to vent wit, Lord deliver us.


XXII.

    In Churches, when the'infirmitie                               190
  Of him which speakes, diminishes the Word,
    When Magistrates doe mis-apply
  To us, as we judge, lay or ghostly sword,
        When plague, which is thine Angell, raignes,
        Or wars, thy Champions, swaie,                             195
  When Heresie, thy second deluge, gaines;
  In th'houre of death, the'Eve of last judgement day,
  Deliver us from the sinister way.


XXIII.

    Heare us, O heare us Lord; to thee
  A sinner is more musique, when he prayes,                        200
    Then spheares, or Angels praises bee,
  In Panegyrique Allelujaes;
        Heare us, for till thou heare us, Lord
        We know not what to say;
  Thine eare to'our sighes, teares, thoughts gives voice and word. 205
  O Thou who Satan heard'st in Jobs sicke day,
  Heare thy selfe now, for thou in us dost pray.


XXIV.

    That wee may change to evennesse
  This intermitting aguish Pietie;
    That snatching cramps of wickednesse                           210
  And Apoplexies of fast sin, may die;
        That musique of thy promises,
        Not threats in Thunder may
  Awaken us to our just offices;
  What in thy booke, thou dost, or creatures say,                  215
  That we may heare, Lord heare us, when wee pray.


XXV.

    That our eares sicknesse wee may cure,
  And rectifie those Labyrinths aright,
    That wee, by harkning, not procure
  Our praise, nor others dispraise so invite,                      220
        That wee get not a slipperinesse
        And senslesly decline,
  From hearing bold wits jeast at Kings excesse,
  To'admit the like of majestie divine,
  That we may locke our eares, Lord open thine.                    225


XXVI.

    That living law, the Magistrate,
  Which to give us, and make us physicke, doth
    Our vices often aggravate,
  That Preachers taxing sinne, before her growth,
        That Satan, and invenom'd men                              230
        Which well, if we starve, dine,
  When they doe most accuse us, may see then
  Us, to amendment, heare them; thee decline:
  That we may open our eares, Lord lock thine.


XXVII.

    That learning, thine Ambassador,                               235
  From thine allegeance wee never tempt,
    That beauty, paradises flower
  For physicke made, from poyson be exempt,
        That wit, borne apt high good to doe,
        By dwelling lazily                                         240
  On Natures nothing, be not nothing too,
  That our affections kill us not, nor dye,
  Heare us, weake ecchoes, O thou eare, and cry.


XXVIII.

    Sonne of God heare us, and since thou
  By taking our blood, owest it us againe,                         245
    Gaine to thy self, or us allow;
  And let not both us and thy selfe be slaine;
        O Lambe of God, which took'st our sinne
        Which could not stick to thee,
  O let it not returne to us againe,                               250
  But Patient and Physition being free,
  As sinne is nothing, let it no where be.



_Vpon the translation of the Psalmes by Sir_ Philip Sydney,
_and the Countesse of Pembroke his Sister._

  Eternall God, (for whom who ever dare
  Seeke new expressions, doe the Circle square,
  And thrust into strait corners of poore wit
  Thee, who art cornerlesse and infinite)
  I would but blesse thy Name, not name thee now;                    5
  (And thy gifts are as infinite as thou:)
  Fixe we our prayses therefore on this one,
  That, as thy blessed Spirit fell upon
  These Psalmes first Author in a cloven tongue;
  (For 'twas a double power by which he sung                        10
  The highest matter in the noblest forme;)
  So thou hast cleft that spirit, to performe
  That worke againe, and shed it, here, upon
  Two, by their bloods, and by thy Spirit one;
  A Brother and a Sister, made by thee                              15
  The Organ, where thou art the Harmony.
  Two that make one _Iohn Baptists_ holy voyce,
  And who that Psalme, _Now let the Iles rejoyce_,
  Have both translated, and apply'd it too,
  Both told us what, and taught us how to doe.                      20
  They shew us Ilanders our joy, our King,
  They tell us _why_, and teach us _how_ to sing;
  Make all this All, three Quires, heaven, earth, and sphears;
  The first, Heaven, hath a song, but no man heares,
  The Spheares have Musick, but they have no tongue,                25
  Their harmony is rather danc'd than sung;
  But our third Quire, to which the first gives eare,
  (For, Angels learne by what the Church does here)
  This Quire hath all. The Organist is hee
  Who hath tun'd God and Man, the Organ we:                         30
  The songs are these, which heavens high holy Muse
  Whisper'd to _David_, _David_ to the Iewes:
  And _Davids_ Successors, in holy zeale,
  In formes of joy and art doe re-reveale
  To us so sweetly and sincerely too,                               35
  That I must not rejoyce as I would doe
  When I behold that these Psalmes are become
  So well attyr'd abroad, so ill at home,
  So well in Chambers, in thy Church so ill,
  As I can scarce call that reform'd untill                         40
  This be reform'd; Would a whole State present
  A lesser gift than some one man hath sent?
  And shall our Church, unto our Spouse and King
  More hoarse, more harm than any other, sing?
  For _that_ we pray, we praise thy name for _this_,                45
  Which, by this _Moses_ and this _Miriam_, is
  Already done; and as those Psalmes we call
  (Though some have other Authors) _Davids_ all:
  So though some have, some may some Psalmes translate,
  We thy Sydnean Psalmes shall celebrate,                           50
  And, till we come th'Extemporall song to sing,
  (Learn'd the first hower, that we see the King,
  Who hath translated those translators) may
  These their sweet learned labours, all the way
  Be as our tuning; that, when hence we part,                       55
  We may fall in with them, and sing our part.




_Ode: Of our Sense of Sinne._

  1. Vengeance will sit above our faults; but till
          She there doth sit,
  We see _her_ not, nor _them_. Thus, blinde, yet still
  We leade her way; and thus, whil'st we doe ill,
          We suffer it.                                              5

  2. Vnhappy he, whom youth makes not beware
          Of doing ill.
  Enough we labour under age, and care;
  In number, th'errours of the last place, are
          The greatest still.                                       10

  3. Yet we, that should the ill we now begin
          As soone repent,
  (Strange thing!) perceive not; our faults are not seen,
  But past us; neither felt, but onely in
          The punishment.                                           15

  4. But we know our selves least; Mere outward shews
          Our mindes so store,
  That our soules, no more than our eyes disclose
  But forme and colour. Onely he who knowes
          Himselfe, knowes more.                                    20

  _I. D._




_To M^{r}_ Tilman _after he had taken orders._

  Thou, whose diviner soule hath caus'd thee now
  To put thy hand unto the holy Plough,
  Making Lay-scornings of the Ministry,
  Not an impediment, but victory;
  What bringst thou home with thee? how is thy mind                  5
  Affected since the vintage? Dost thou finde
  New thoughts and stirrings in thee? and as Steele
  Toucht with a Loadstone, dost new motions feele?
  Or, as a Ship after much paine and care,
  For Iron and Cloth brings home rich Indian ware,                  10
  Hast thou thus traffiqu'd, but with farre more gaine
  Of noble goods, and with lesse time and paine?
  Thou art the same materials, as before,
  Onely the stampe is changed; but no more.
  And as new crowned Kings alter the face,                          15
  But not the monies substance; so hath grace
  Chang'd onely Gods old Image by Creation,
  To Christs new stampe, at this thy Coronation;
  Or, as we paint Angels with wings, because
  They beare Gods message, and proclaime his lawes,                 20
  Since thou must doe the like, and so must move,
  Art thou new feather'd with cœlestiall love?
  Deare, tell me where thy purchase lies, and shew
  What thy advantage is above, below.
  But if thy gainings doe surmount expression,                      25
  Why doth the foolish world scorne that profession,
  Whose joyes passe speech? Why do they think unfit
  That Gentry should joyne families with it?
  As if their day were onely to be spent
  In dressing, Mistressing and complement;                          30
  Alas poore joyes, but poorer men, whose trust
  Seemes richly placed in sublimed dust;
  (For, such are cloathes and beauty, which though gay,
  Are, at the best, but of sublimed clay.)
  Let then the world thy calling disrespect,                        35
  But goe thou on, and pitty their neglect.
  What function is so noble, as to bee
  Embassadour to God and destinie?
  To open life, to give kingdomes to more
  Than Kings give dignities; to keepe heavens doore?                40
  _Maries_ prerogative was to beare Christ, so
  'Tis preachers to convey him, for they doe
  As Angels out of clouds, from Pulpits speake;
  And blesse the poore beneath, the lame, the weake.
  If then th'Astronomers, whereas they spie                         45
  A new-found Starre, their Opticks magnifie,
  How brave are those, who with their Engine, can
  Bring man to heaven, and heaven againe to man?
  These are thy titles and preheminences,
  In whom must meet Gods graces, mens offences,                     50
  And so the heavens which beget all things here,
  And the earth our mother, which these things doth beare,
  Both these in thee, are in thy Calling knit,
  And make thee now a blest Hermaphrodite.



_A Hymne to Christ, at the Authors last going into Germany._

  In what torne ship soever I embarke,
  That ship shall be my embleme of thy Arke;
  What sea soever swallow mee, that flood
  Shall be to mee an embleme of thy blood;
  Though thou with clouds of anger do disguise                       5
  Thy race; yet through that maske I know those eyes,
    Which, though they turne away sometimes,
      They never will despise.

  I sacrifice this Iland unto thee,
  And all whom I lov'd there, and who lov'd mee;                    10
  When I have put our seas twixt them and mee,
  Put thou thy sea betwixt my sinnes and thee.
  As the trees sap doth seeke the root below
  In winter, in my winter now I goe,
    Where none but thee, th'Eternall root                           15
      Of true Love I may know.

  Nor thou nor thy religion dost controule,
  The amorousnesse of an harmonious Soule,
  But thou would'st have that love thy selfe: As thou
  Art jealous, Lord, so I am jealous now,                           20
  Thou lov'st not, till from loving more, thou free
  My soule: Who ever gives, takes libertie:
    O, if thou car'st not whom I love
      Alas, thou lov'st not mee.

  Seale then this bill of my Divorce to All,                        25
  On whom those fainter beames of love did fall;
  Marry those loves, which in youth scattered bee
  On Fame, Wit, Hopes (false mistresses) to thee.
  Churches are best for Prayer, that have least light:
  To see God only, I goe out of sight:                              30
    And to scape stormy dayes, I chuse
      An Everlasting night.



_The Lamentations of Ieremy, for the most part according to
Tremelius._


CHAP. I.

  1 How sits this citie, late most populous,
    Thus solitary, and like a widdow thus!
  Amplest of Nations, Queene of Provinces
    She was, who now thus tributary is!

  2 Still in the night shee weepes, and her teares fall              5
    Downe by her cheekes along, and none of all
  Her lovers comfort her; Perfidiously
    Her friends have dealt, and now are enemie.

  3 Unto great bondage, and afflictions
    Juda is captive led; Those nations                              10
  With whom shee dwells, no place of rest afford,
    In streights shee meets her Persecutors sword.

  4 Emptie are the gates of Sion, and her waies
    Mourne, because none come to her solemne dayes.
  Her Priests doe groane, her maides are comfortlesse,              15
    And shee's unto her selfe a bitternesse.

  5 Her foes are growne her head, and live at Peace,
    Because when her transgressions did increase,
  The Lord strooke her with sadnesse: Th'enemie
    Doth drive her children to captivitie.                          20

  6 From Sions daughter is all beauty gone,
    Like Harts, which seeke for Pasture, and find none,
  Her Princes are, and now before the foe
    Which still pursues them, without strength they go.

  7 Now in her daies of Teares, Jerusalem                           25
    (Her men slaine by the foe, none succouring them)
  Remembers what of old, shee esteemed most,
    Whilest her foes laugh at her, for what she hath lost.

  8 Jerusalem hath sinn'd, therefore is shee
    Remov'd, as women in uncleannesse bee;                          30
  Who honor'd, scorne her, for her foulnesse they
    Have seene; her selfe doth groane, and turne away.

  9 Her foulnesse in her skirts was seene, yet she
    Remembred not her end; Miraculously
  Therefore shee fell, none comforting: Behold                      35
    O Lord my affliction, for the Foe growes bold.

  10 Upon all things where her delight hath beene,
    The foe hath stretch'd his hand, for shee hath seene
  Heathen, whom thou command'st, should not doe so,
    Into her holy Sanctuary goe.                                    40

  11 And all her people groane, and seeke for bread;
    And they have given, only to be fed,
  All precious things, wherein their pleasure lay:
    How cheape I'am growne, O Lord, behold, and weigh.

  12 All this concernes not you, who passe by mee,                  45
    O see, and marke if any sorrow bee
  Like to my sorrow, which Jehova hath
    Done to mee in the day of his fierce wrath?

  13 That fire, which by himselfe is governed
    He hath cast from heaven on my bones, and spred                 50
  A net before my feet, and mee o'rthrowne,
    And made me languish all the day alone.

  14 His hand hath of my sinnes framed a yoake
    Which wreath'd, and cast upon my neck, hath broke
  My strength. The Lord unto those enemies                          55
    Hath given mee, from whom I cannot rise.

  15 He under foot hath troden in my sight
    My strong men; He did company invite
  To breake my young men; he the winepresse hath
    Trod upon Juda's daughter in his wrath.                         60

  16 For these things doe I weepe, mine eye, mine eye
    Casts water out; For he which should be nigh
  To comfort mee, is now departed farre;
    The foe prevailes, forlorne my children are.

  17 There's none, though _Sion_ do stretch out her hand,           65
    To comfort her, it is the Lords command
  That _Iacobs_ foes girt him. _Ierusalem_
    Is as an uncleane woman amongst them.

  18 But yet the Lord is just, and righteous still,
    I have rebell'd against his holy will;                          70
  O heare all people, and my sorrow see,
    My maides, my young men in captivitie.

  19 I called for my _lovers_ then, but they
    Deceiv'd mee, and my Priests, and Elders lay
  Dead in the citie; for they sought for meat                       75
    Which should refresh their soules, they could not get.

  20 Because I am in streights, _Iehova_ see
    My heart o'rturn'd, my bowells muddy bee,
  Because I have rebell'd so much, as fast
    The sword without, as death within, doth wast.                  80

  21 Of all which heare I mourne, none comforts mee,
    My foes have heard my griefe, and glad they be,
  That thou hast done it; But thy promis'd day
    Will come, when, as I suffer, so shall they.

  22 Let all their wickednesse appeare to thee,                     85
    Doe unto them, as thou hast done to mee,
  For all my sinnes: The sighs which I have had
    Are very many, and my heart is sad.


CHAP. II.

  1 How over Sions daughter hath God hung
    His wraths thicke cloud! and from heaven hath flung             90
  To earth the beauty of _Israel_, and hath
    Forgot his foot-stoole in the day of wrath!

  2 The Lord unsparingly hath swallowed
    All Jacobs dwellings, and demolished
  To ground the strengths of _Iuda_, and prophan'd                  95
    The Princes of the Kingdome, and the land.

  3 In heat of wrath, the horne of _Israel_ hee
    Hath cleane cut off, and lest the enemie
  Be hindred, his right hand he doth retire,
    But is towards _Iacob_, All-devouring fire.                    100

  4 Like to an enemie he bent his bow,
    His right hand was in posture of a foe,
  To kill what _Sions_ daughter did desire,
    'Gainst whom his wrath, he poured forth, like fire.

  5 For like an enemie _Iehova_ is,                                105
    Devouring _Israel_, and his Palaces,
  Destroying holds, giving additions
    To _Iuda's_ daughters lamentations.

  6 Like to a garden hedge he hath cast downe
    The place where was his congregation,                          110
  And _Sions_ feasts and sabbaths are forgot;
    Her King, her Priest, his wrath regardeth not.

  7 The Lord forsakes his Altar, and detests
    His Sanctuary, and in the foes hand rests
  His Palace, and the walls, in which their cries                  115
    Are heard, as in the true solemnities.

  8 The Lord hath cast a line, so to confound
    And levell _Sions_ walls unto the ground;
  He drawes not back his hand, which doth oreturne
    The wall, and Rampart, which together mourne.                  120

  9 Their gates are sunke into the ground, and hee
    Hath broke the barres; their King and Princes bee
  Amongst the heathen, without law, nor there
    Unto their Prophets doth the Lord appeare.

  10 There _Sions Elders_ on the ground are plac'd,                125
    And silence keepe; Dust on their heads they cast,
  In sackcloth have they girt themselves, and low
    The Virgins towards ground, their heads do throw.

  11 My bowells are growne muddy, and mine eyes
    Are faint with weeping: and my liver lies                      130
  Pour'd out upon the ground, for miserie
    That sucking children in the streets doe die.

  12 When they had cryed unto their Mothers, where
    Shall we have bread, and drinke? they fainted there,
  And in the streets like wounded persons lay                      135
    Till 'twixt their mothers breasts they went away.

  13 _Daughter Ierusalem_, Oh what may bee
    A witnesse, or comparison for thee?
  Sion, to ease thee, what shall I name like thee?
    Thy breach is like the sea, what help can bee?                 140

  14 For thee vaine foolish things thy Prophets sought,
    Thee, thine iniquities they have not taught,
  Which might disturne thy bondage: but for thee
    False burthens, and false causes they would see.

  15 The passengers doe clap their hands, and hisse,               145
    And wag their head at thee, and say, Is this
  That citie, which so many men did call
    Joy of the earth, and perfectest of all?

  16 Thy foes doe gape upon thee, and they hisse,
    And gnash their teeth, and say, Devoure wee this,              150
  For this is certainly the day which wee
    Expected, and which now we finde, and see.

  17 The Lord hath done that which he purposed,
    Fulfill'd his word of old determined;
  He hath throwne downe, and not spar'd, and thy foe               155
    Made glad above thee, and advanc'd him so.

  18 But now, their hearts against the Lord do call,
    Therefore, O walls of _Sion_, let teares fall
  Downe like a river, day and night; take thee
    No rest, but let thine eye incessant be.                       160

  19 Arise, cry in the night, poure, for thy sinnes,
    Thy heart, like water, when the watch begins;
  Lift up thy hands to God, lest children dye,
    Which, faint for hunger, in the streets doe lye.

  20 Behold O Lord, consider unto whom                             165
    Thou hast done this; what, shall the women come
  To eate their children of a spanne? shall thy
    Prophet and Priest be slaine in Sanctuary?

  21 On ground in streets, the yong and old do lye,
    My virgins and yong men by sword do dye;                         170
  Them in the day of thy wrath thou hast slaine,
    Nothing did thee from killing them containe.

  22 As to a solemne feast, all whom I fear'd
    Thou call'st about mee; when his wrath appear'd,
  None did remaine or scape, for those which I                     175
    Brought up, did perish by mine enemie.


CHAP. III.

  1 I am the man which have affliction seene,
    Under the rod of Gods wrath having beene,
  2 He hath led mee to darknesse, not to light,
    3 And against mee all day, his hand doth fight.                180

  4 Hee hath broke my bones, worne out my flesh and skinne,
    5 Built up against mee; and hath girt mee in
  With hemlocke, and with labour; 6 and set mee
    In darke, as they who dead for ever bee.

  7 Hee hath hedg'd me lest I scape, and added more                185
    To my steele fetters, heavier then before.
  8 When I crie out, he out shuts my prayer: 9 And hath
    Stop'd with hewn stone my way, and turn'd my path.

  10 And like a Lion hid in secrecie,
    Or Beare which lyes in wait, he was to mee.                    190
  11 He stops my way, teares me, made desolate,
    12 And hee makes mee the marke he shooteth at.

  13 Hee made the children of his quiver passe
    Into my reines, 14 I with my people was
  All the day long, a song and mockery.                            195
    15 Hee hath fill'd mee with bitternesse, and he

  Hath made me drunke with wormewood. 16 He hath burst
    My teeth with stones, and covered mee with dust;
  17 And thus my Soule farre off from peace was set,
    And my prosperity I did forget.                                200

  18 My strength, my hope (unto my selfe I said)
    Which from the Lord should come, is perished.
  19 But when my mournings I do thinke upon,
    My wormwood, hemlocke, and affliction,

  20 My Soule is humbled in remembring this;                       205
    21 My heart considers, therefore, hope there is.
  22 'Tis Gods great mercy we'are not utterly
    Consum'd, for his compassions do not die;

  23 For every morning they renewed bee,
    For great, O Lord, is thy fidelity.                            210
  24 The Lord is, saith my Soule, my portion,
    And therefore in him will I hope alone.

  25 The Lord is good to them, who on him relie,
    And to the Soule that seeks him earnestly.
  26 It is both good to trust, and to attend                       215
    (The Lords salvation) unto the end:

  27 'Tis good for one his yoake in youth to beare;
    28 He sits alone, and doth all speech forbeare,
  Because he hath borne it. 29 And his mouth he layes
    Deepe in the dust, yet then in hope he stayes.                 220

  30 He gives his cheekes to whosoever will
    Strike him, and so he is reproched still.
  31 For, not for ever doth the Lord forsake,
    32 But when he'hath strucke with sadnes, hee doth take

  Compassion, as his mercy'is infinite;                            225
    33 Nor is it with his heart, that he doth smite;
  34 That underfoot the prisoners stamped bee,
    35 That a mans right the Judge himselfe doth see

  To be wrung from him, 36 That he subverted is
    In his just cause; the Lord allowes not this.                  230
  37 Who then will say, that ought doth come to passe,
    But that which by the Lord commanded was?

  38 Both good and evill from his mouth proceeds;
    39 Why then grieves any man for his misdeeds?
  40 Turne wee to God, by trying out our wayes;                    235
    41 To him in heaven, our hands with hearts upraise.

  42 Wee have rebell'd, and falne away from thee,
    Thou pardon'st not; 43 Usest no clemencie;
  Pursuest us, kill'st us, coverest us with wrath,
    44 Cover'st thy selfe with clouds, that our prayer hath        240

  No power to passe. 45 And thou hast made us fall
    As refuse, and off-scouring to them all.
  46 All our foes gape at us. 47 Feare and a snare
    With ruine, and with waste, upon us are.

  48 With watry rivers doth mine eye oreflow                       245
    For ruine of my peoples daughter so;
  49 Mine eye doth drop downe teares incessantly,
    50 Untill the Lord looke downe from heaven to see.

  51 And for my citys daughters sake, mine eye
    Doth breake mine heart. 52 Causles mine enemy,                 250
  Like a bird chac'd me. 53 In a dungeon
    They have shut my life, and cast on me a stone.

  54 Waters flow'd o'r my head, then thought I, I am
    Destroy'd; 55 I called Lord, upon thy name
  Out of the pit. 56 And thou my voice didst heare;                255
    Oh from my sigh, and crye, stop not thine eare.

  57 Then when I call'd upon thee, thou drew'st nere
    Unto mee, and said'st unto mee, do not feare.
  58 Thou Lord my Soules cause handled hast, and thou
    Rescud'st my life. 59 O Lord do thou judge now,                260

  Thou heardst my wrong. 60 Their vengeance all they have wrought;
    61 How they reproach'd, thou hast heard, and what they thought,
  62 What their lips uttered, which against me rose,
    And what was ever whisper'd by my foes.

  63 I am their song, whether they rise or sit,                    265
    64 Give them rewards Lord, for their working fit,
  65 Sorrow of heart, thy curse. 66 And with thy might
    Follow, and from under heaven destroy them quite.


CHAP. IV.

  1 How is the gold become so dimme? How is
    Purest and finest gold thus chang'd to this?                   270
  The stones which were stones of the Sanctuary,
    Scattered in corners of each street do lye.

  2 The pretious sonnes of Sion, which should bee
    Valued at purest gold, how do wee see
  Low rated now, as earthen Pitchers, stand,                       275
    Which are the worke of a poore Potters hand.

  3 Even the Sea-calfes draw their brests, and give
    Sucke to their young; my peoples daughters live,
  By reason of the foes great cruelnesse,
    As do the Owles in the vast Wildernesse.                       280

  4 And when the sucking child doth strive to draw,
    His tongue for thirst cleaves to his upper jaw.
  And when for bread the little children crye,
    There is no man that doth them satisfie.

  5 They which before were delicately fed,                         285
    Now in the streets forlorne have perished,
  And they which ever were in scarlet cloath'd,
    Sit and embrace the dunghills which they loath'd.

  6 The daughters of my people have sinned more,
    Then did the towne of _Sodome_ sinne before;                   290
  Which being at once destroy'd, there did remaine
    No hands amongst them, to vexe them againe.

  7 But heretofore purer her Nazarite
    Was then the snow, and milke was not so white;
  As carbuncles did their pure bodies shine,                       295
    And all their polish'dnesse was Saphirine.

  8 They are darker now then blacknes, none can know
    Them by the face, as through the streets they goe,
  For now their skin doth cleave unto the bone,
    And withered, is like to dry wood growne.                      300

  9 Better by sword then famine 'tis to dye;
    And better through pierc'd, then through penury.
  10 Women by nature pitifull, have eate
    Their children drest with their owne hands for meat.

  11 _Iehova_ here fully accomplish'd hath                         305
    His indignation, and powr'd forth his wrath,
  Kindled a fire in _Sion_, which hath power
    To eate, and her foundations to devour.

  12 Nor would the Kings of the earth, nor all which live
    In the inhabitable world beleeve,                              310
  That any adversary, any foe
    Into _Ierusalem_ should enter so.

  13 For the Priests sins, and Prophets, which have shed
    Blood in the streets, and the just murthered:
  14 Which when those men, whom they made blinde, did stray        315
    Thorough the streets, defiled by the way

  With blood, the which impossible it was
    Their garments should scape touching, as they passe,
  15 Would cry aloud, depart defiled men,
    Depart, depart, and touch us not; and then                       320

  They fled, and strayd, and with the _Gentiles_ were,
    Yet told their friends, they should not long dwell there;
  16 For this they are scattered by Jehovahs face
    Who never will regard them more; No grace

  Unto their old men shall the foe afford,                         325
    Nor, that they are Priests, redeeme them from the sword.
  17 And wee as yet, for all these miseries
    Desiring our vaine helpe, consume our eyes:

  And such a nation as cannot save,
    We in desire and speculation have.                             330
  18 They hunt our steps, that in the streets wee feare
    To goe: our end is now approached neere,

  Our dayes accomplish'd are, this the last day.
    19 Eagles of heaven are not so swift as they
  Which follow us, o'r mountaine tops they flye                    335
    At us, and for us in the desart lye.

  20 The annointed Lord, breath of our nostrils, hee
    Of whom we said, under his shadow, wee
  Shall with more ease under the Heathen dwell,
    Into the pit which these men digged, fell.                     340

  21 Rejoyce O _Edoms daughter_, joyfull bee
    Thou which inhabitst _Huz_, for unto thee
  This cup shall passe, and thou with drunkennesse
    Shalt fill thy selfe, and shew thy nakednesse.

  22 And then thy sinnes O _Sion_, shall be spent,                 345
    The Lord will not leave thee in banishment.
  Thy sinnes O _Edoms daughter_, hee will see,
    And for them, pay thee with captivitie.


CHAP. V.

   1 Remember, O Lord, what is fallen on us;
      See, and marke how we are reproached thus,                   350
   2 For unto strangers our possession
      Is turn'd, our houses unto Aliens gone,

   3 Our mothers are become as widowes, wee
      As Orphans all, and without father be;
   4 Waters which are our owne, wee drunke, and pay,               355
      And upon our owne wood a price they lay.

   5 Our persecutors on our necks do sit,
      They make us travaile, and not intermit,
   6 We stretch our hands unto th'_Egyptians_
      To get us bread; and to the _Assyrians_.                     360

   7 Our Fathers did these sinnes, and are no more,
      But wee do beare the sinnes they did before.
   8 They are but servants, which do rule us thus,
      Yet from their hands none would deliver us.

   9 With danger of our life our bread wee gat;                    365
      For in the wildernesse, the sword did wait.
  10 The tempests of this famine wee liv'd in,
      Black as an Oven colour'd had our skinne:

  11 In _Iudaes_ cities they the maids abus'd
      By force, and so women in _Sion_ us'd.                        370
  12 The Princes with their hands they hung; no grace
      Nor honour gave they to the Elders face.

  13 Unto the mill our yong men carried are,
      And children fell under the wood they bare.
  14 Elders, the gates; youth did their songs forbeare,            375
  15  Gone was our joy; our dancings, mournings were.

  16 Now is the crowne falne from our head; and woe
      Be unto us, because we'have sinned so.
  17 For this our hearts do languish, and for this
      Over our eyes a cloudy dimnesse is.                           380

  18 Because mount _Sion_ desolate doth lye,
      And foxes there do goe at libertie:
  19 But thou O Lord art ever, and thy throne
      From generation, to generation.

  20 Why should'st thou forget us eternally?                       385
      Or leave us thus long in this misery?
  21 Restore us Lord to thee, that so we may
      Returne, and as of old, renew our day.

  22 For oughtest thou, O Lord, despise us thus,
      And to be utterly enrag'd at us?                              390





_Hymne to God my God, in my sicknesse._

  Since I am comming to that Holy roome,
    Where, with thy Quire of Saints for evermore,
  I shall be made thy Musique; As I come
    I tune the Instrument here at the dore,
    And what I must doe then, thinke here before.                    5

  Whilst my Physitians by their love are growne
    Cosmographers, and I their Mapp, who lie
  Flat on this bed, that by them may be showne
    That this is my South-west discoverie
    _Per fretum febris_, by these streights to die,                 10

  I joy, that in these straits, I see my West;
    For, though theire currants yeeld returne to none,
  What shall my West hurt me? As West and East
    In all flatt Maps (and I am one) are one,
    So death doth touch the Resurrection.                           15

  Is the Pacifique Sea my home? Or are
    The Easterne riches? Is _Ierusalem_?
  _Anyan_, and _Magellan_, and _Gibraltare_,
    All streights, and none but streights, are wayes to them,
    Whether where _Iaphet_ dwelt, or _Cham_, or _Sem_.              20

  We thinke that _Paradise_ and _Calvarie_,
    _Christs_ Crosse, and _Adams_ tree, stood in one place;
  Looke Lord, and finde both _Adams_ met in me;
    As the first _Adams_ sweat surrounds my face,
    May the last _Adams_ blood my soule embrace.                    25

  So, in his purple wrapp'd receive mee Lord,
    By these his thornes give me his other Crowne;
  And as to others soules I preach'd thy word,
    Be this my Text, my Sermon to mine owne,
    Therfore that he may raise the Lord throws down.                30





_A Hymne to God the Father:_

I.

  Wilt thou forgive that sinne where I begunne,
    Which was my sin, though it were done before?
  Wilt thou forgive that sinne; through which I runne,
    And do run still: though still I do deplore?
      When thou hast done, thou hast not done,                       5
                For, I have more.

II.

  Wilt thou forgive that sinne which I have wonne
    Others to sinne? and, made my sinne their doore?
  Wilt thou forgive that sinne which I did shunne
    A yeare, or two: but wallowed in, a score?                      10
      When thou hast done, thou hast not done,
                For I have more.

III.

  I have a sinne of feare, that when I have spunne
    My last thred, I shall perish on the shore;
  But sweare by thy selfe, that at my death thy sonne               15
    Shall shine as he shines now, and heretofore;
      And, having done that, Thou haste done,
                I feare no more.






_To Christ._

  Wilt thou forgive that sinn, where I begunn,
    W^{ch} is my sinn, though it were done before?
  Wilt thou forgive those sinns through w^{ch} I runn
    And doe them still, though still I doe deplore?
      When thou hast done, thou hast not done,                       5
                for I have more.

  Wilt thou forgive that sinn, by w^{ch} I'have wonne
    Others to sinn, & made my sinn their dore?
  Wilt thou forgive that sinn w^{ch} I did shunne
    A yeare or twoe, but wallowed in a score?                       10
      When thou hast done, thou hast not done,
                for I have more.

  I have a sinn of feare y^t when I have spunn
    My last thred, I shall perish on the shore;
  Sweare by thy self that at my Death, thy Sunn                     15
    Shall shine as it shines nowe, & heretofore;
      And having done that, thou hast done,
                I have noe more.




ELEGIES UPON THE AUTHOR


TO THE MEMORIE OF MY EVER DESIRED FRIEND

D^r. DONNE.

    To have liv'd eminent, in a degree
  Beyond our lofty'st flights, that is, like Thee,
  Or t'have had too much merit, is not safe;
  For, such excesses finde no Epitaph.
  At common graves we have Poetique eyes                             5
  Can melt themselves in easie Elegies,
  Each quill can drop his tributary verse,
  And pin it, like the Hatchments, to the Hearse:
  But at Thine, Poeme, or Inscription
  (Rich soule of wit, and language) we have none.                   10
  Indeed a silence does that tombe befit,
  Where is no Herald left to blazon it.
  Widow'd invention justly doth forbeare
  To come abroad, knowing Thou art not here,
  Late her great Patron; Whose Prerogative                          15
  Maintain'd, and cloth'd her so, as none alive
  Must now presume, to keepe her at thy rate,
  Though he the Indies for her dowre estate.
  Or else that awfull fire, which once did burne
  In thy cleare Braine, now falne into thy Urne                     20
  Lives there, to fright rude Empiricks from thence,
  Which might prophane thee by their Ignorance.
  Who ever writes of Thee, and in a stile
  Unworthy such a Theme, does but revile
  Thy precious Dust, and wake a learned Spirit                      25
  Which may revenge his Rapes upon thy Merit.
  For, all a low pitch't phansie can devise,
  Will prove, at best, but Hallow'd Injuries.
    Thou, like the dying Swanne, didst lately sing
  Thy Mournfull Dirge, in audience of the King;                     30
  When pale lookes, and faint accents of thy breath,
  Presented so, to life, that peece of death,
  That it was fear'd, and prophesi'd by all,
  Thou thither cam'st to preach thy Funerall.
  O! had'st Thou in an Elegiacke Knell                              35
  Rung out unto the world thine owne farewell,
  And in thy High Victorious Numbers beate
  The solemne measure of thy griev'd Retreat;
  Thou might'st the Poets service now have mist
  As well, as then thou did'st prevent the Priest;                  40
  And never to the world beholding bee
  So much, as for an Epitaph for thee.
    I doe not like the office. Nor is't fit
  Thou, who did'st lend our Age such summes of wit,
  Should'st now re-borrow from her bankrupt Mine,                   45
  That Ore to Bury Thee, which once was Thine,
  Rather still leave us in thy debt; And know
  (Exalted Soule) more glory 'tis to owe
  Unto thy Hearse, what we can never pay,
  Then, with embased Coine those Rites defray.                      50
    Commit we then Thee to Thy selfe: Nor blame
  Our drooping loves, which thus to thy owne Fame
  Leave Thee Executour. Since, but thine owne,
  No pen could doe Thee Justice, nor Bayes Crowne
  Thy vast desert; Save that, wee nothing can                       55
  Depute, to be thy Ashes Guardian.
    So Jewellers no Art, or Metall trust
    To forme the Diamond, but the Diamonds dust.

  _H. K._




To the deceased Author,

Upon the _Promiscuous_ printing of his Poems, the _Looser sort_, with
the _Religious_.

  When thy _Loose_ raptures, _Donne_, shall meet with Those
          That doe confine
        Tuning, unto the Duller line,
      And sing not, but in _Sanctified Prose_;
        How will they, with sharper eyes,                            5
      The _Fore-skinne_ of thy phansie circumcise?
  And feare, thy _wantonnesse_ should now, begin
  _Example_, that hath ceased to be _Sin_?

  And that _Feare_ fannes their _Heat_; whilst knowing eyes
          Will not admire                                           10
        At this _Strange Fire_,
      That here is _mingled with thy Sacrifice_:
        But dare reade even thy _Wanton Story_,
      As thy _Confession_, not thy _Glory_.
  And will so envie _Both_ to future times,                         15
  That they would buy thy _Goodnesse_, with thy _Crimes_.

  _Tho: Browne._




_On the death of D^r DONNE._

  I Cannot blame those men, that knew thee well,
  Yet dare not helpe the world, to ring thy knell
  In tunefull _Elegies_; there's not language knowne
  Fit for thy mention, but 'twas first thy owne;
  The _Epitaphs_ thou writst, have so bereft                         5
  Our tongue of wit, there is not phansie left
  Enough to weepe thee; what henceforth we see
  Of Art or Nature, must result from thee.
  There may perchance some busie gathering friend
  Steale from thy owne workes, and that, varied, lend,              10
  Which thou bestow'st on others, to thy Hearse,
  And so thou shalt live still in thine owne verse;
  Hee that shall venture farther, may commit
  A pitied errour, shew his zeale, not wit.
  Fate hath done mankinde wrong; vertue may aime                    15
  Reward of conscience, never can, of fame,
  Since her great trumpet's broke, could onely give
  Faith to the world, command it to beleeve;
    Hee then must write, that would define thy parts:
    _Here lyes the best Divinitie, All the Arts._                   20

  _Edw. Hyde_.






_On Doctor =Donne=,

By D' =C. B.= of =O.=_

  Hee that would write an Epitaph for thee,
  And do it well, must first beginne to be
  Such as thou wert; for, none can truly know
  Thy worth, thy life, but he that hath liv'd so;
  He must have wit to spare and to hurle downe:                      5
  Enough, to keepe the gallants of the towne.
  He must have learning plenty; both the Lawes,
  Civill, and Common, to judge any cause;
  Divinity great store, above the rest;
  Not of the last Edition, but the best.                            10
  Hee must have language, travaile, all the Arts;
  Judgement to use; or else he wants thy parts.
  He must have friends the highest, able to do;
  Such as _Mecœnas_, and _Augustus_ too.
  He must have such a sicknesse, such a death;                      15
  Or else his vaine descriptions come beneath;
    Who then shall write an Epitaph for thee,
    He must be dead first, let'it alone for mee.






_An Elegie upon the incomparable D^{r} DONNE._

  All is not well when such a one as I
  Dare peepe abroad, and write an _Elegie_;
  When smaller _Starres_ appeare, and give their light,
  _Phœbus_ is gone to bed: Were it not night,
  And the world witlesse now that DONNE is dead,                     5
  You sooner should have broke, then seene my head.
  Dead did I say? Forgive this _Injury_
  I doe him, and his worthes _Infinity_,
  To say he is but dead; I dare averre
  It better may be term'd a _Massacre_,                             10
  Then _Sleepe_ or _Death_; See how the _Muses_ mourne
  Upon their oaten _Reeds_, and from his _Vrne_
  Threaten the World with this _Calamity_,
    They shall have _Ballads_, but no _Poetry_.
  _Language_ lyes speechlesse; and _Divinity_,                      15
  Lost such a _Trump_ as even to _Extasie_
  Could charme the Soule, and had an _Influence_
  To teach best _judgements_, and please dullest _Sense_.
  The _Court_, the _Church_, the _Vniversitie_,
  Lost _Chaplaine_, _Deane_, and _Doctor_, All these, Three.        20
    It was his _Merit_, that his _Funerall_
    Could cause a losse so _great_ and _generall_.

  If there be any Spirit can answer give
  Of such as hence depart, to such as live:
  Speake, Doth his body there vermiculate,                          25
  Crumble to dust, and feele the lawes of Fate?
  Me thinkes, _Corruption_, _Wormes_, what else is foule
  Should spare the _Temple_ of so faire a _Soule_.
  I could beleeve they doe; but that I know
  What inconvenience might hereafter grow:                          30
    Succeeding ages would _Idolatrize_,
    And as his _Numbers_, so his _Reliques_ prize.

  If that Philosopher, which did avow
  The world to be but Motes, was living now:
  He would affirme that th' _Atomes_ of his mould                   35
  Were they in severall bodies blended, would
  Produce new worlds of _Travellers_, _Divines_,
  Of _Linguists_, _Poets_: sith these severall _lines_
  In him concentred were, and flowing thence
  Might fill againe the worlds _Circumference_.                     40
  I could beleeve this too; and yet my faith
  Not want a _President_: The _Phœnix_ hath
  (And such was He) a power to animate
  Her ashes, and herselfe perpetuate.
  But, busie Soule, thou dost not well to pry                       45
  Into these Secrets; _Griefe_, and _Iealousie_,
  The more they know, the further still advance,
  And finde no way so safe as _Ignorance_.
  Let this suffice thee, that his _Soule_ which flew
  A pitch of all admir'd, known but of few,                         50
  (Save those of purer mould) is now translated
  From Earth to Heaven, and there _Constellated_.
    For, if each _Priest_ of God shine as a _Starre_,
    His _Glory_ is as his _Gifts_, 'bove others farre.

  HEN. VALENTINE.




_An Elegie upon D^{r}_ Donne.

  Is _Donne_, great _Donne_ deceas'd? then England say
  Thou 'hast lost a man where language chose to stay
  And shew it's gracefull power. I would not praise
  That and his vast wit (which in these vaine dayes
  Make many proud) but as they serv'd to unlock                      5
  That Cabinet, his minde: where such a stock
  Of knowledge was repos'd, as all lament
  (Or should) this generall cause of discontent.
    And I rejoyce I am not so severe,
  But (as I write a line) to weepe a teare                          10
  For his decease; Such sad extremities
  May make such men as I write _Elegies_.
    And wonder not; for, when a generall losse
  Falls on a nation, and they slight the crosse,
  God hath rais'd _Prophets_ to awaken them                         15
  From stupifaction; witnesse my milde pen,
  Not us'd to upbraid the world, though now it must
  Freely and boldly, for, the cause is just.
    Dull age, Oh I would spare thee, but th'art worse,
  Thou art not onely dull, but hast a curse                         20
  Of black ingratitude; if not, couldst thou
  Part with _miraculous Donne_, and make no vow
  For thee and thine, successively to pay
  A sad remembrance to his dying day?
    Did his youth scatter _Poetrie_, wherein                        25
  Was all Philosophie? Was every sinne,
  Character'd in his _Satyres_? made so foule
  That some have fear'd their shapes, and kept their soule
  Freer by reading verse? Did he give _dayes_
  Past marble monuments, to those, whose praise                     30
  He would perpetuate? Did hee (I feare
  The dull will doubt:) these at his twentieth yeare?
    But, more matur'd: Did his full soule conceive,
  And in harmonious-holy-numbers weave
  A _Crowne of sacred sonets_, fit to adorne                        35
  A dying Martyrs brow: or, to be worne
  On that blest head of _Mary Magdalen_:
  After she wip'd Christs feet, but not till then?
  Did hee (fit for such penitents as shee
  And hee to use) leave us a _Litany_?                              40
  Which all devout men love, and sure, it shall,
  As times grow better, grow more classicall.
  Did he write _Hymnes_, for piety and wit
  Equall to those great grave _Prudentius_ writ?
  Spake he all _Languages_? knew he all _Lawes_?                    45
  The grounds and use of _Physicke_; but because
  'Twas mercenary wav'd it? Went to see
  That blessed place of _Christs nativity_?
  Did he returne and preach him? preach him so
  As none but hee did, or could do? They know                       50
  (Such as were blest to heare him know) 'tis truth.
  Did he confirme thy age? convert thy youth?
  Did he these wonders? And is this deare losse
  Mourn'd by so few? (few for so great a crosse.)
    But sure the silent are ambitious all                           55
  To be _Close Mourners_ at his Funerall;
  If not; In common pitty they forbare
  By repetitions to renew our care;
  Or, knowing, griefe conceiv'd, conceal'd, consumes
  Man irreparably, (as poyson'd fumes                               60
  Do waste the braine) make silence a safe way
  To'inlarge the Soule from these walls, mud and clay,
  (Materialls of this body) to remaine
  With _Donne_ in heaven, where no promiscuous paine
  Lessens the joy wee have, for, with _him_, all                    65
  Are satisfyed with _joyes essentiall_.
    My thoughts, Dwell on this _Ioy_, and do not call
  Griefe backe, by thinking of his Funerall;
  Forget he lov'd mee; Waste not my sad yeares;
  (Which haste to _Davids_ seventy, fill'd with feares              70
  And sorrow for his death;) Forget his parts,
  Which finde a living grave in good mens hearts;
  And, (for, my first is daily paid for sinne)
  Forget to pay my second sigh for him:
  Forget his powerfull preaching; and forget                        75
  I am his _Convert_. Oh my frailtie! let
  My flesh be no more heard, it will obtrude
  This lethargie: so should my gratitude,
  My vowes of gratitude should so be broke;
  Which can no more be, then _Donnes_ vertues spoke                 80
  By any but himselfe; for which cause, I
    Write no _Encomium_, but an _Elegie_.

  IZ. WA.






An Elegie upon the death of the Deane of Pauls, D^r. Iohn Donne:

By _M^r. Tho: Carie_.

  Can we not force from widdowed Poetry,
  Now thou art dead (Great DONNE) one Elegie
  To crowne thy Hearse? Why yet dare we not trust
  Though with unkneaded dowe-bak't prose thy dust,
  Such as the uncisor'd Churchman from the flower                    5
  Of fading Rhetorique, short liv'd as his houre,
  Dry as the sand that measures it, should lay
  Upon thy Ashes, on the funerall day?
  Have we no voice, no tune? Did'st thou dispense
  Through all our language, both the words and sense?               10
  'Tis a sad truth: The Pulpit may her plaine,
  And sober Christian precepts still retaine,
  Doctrines it may, and wholesome Uses frame,
  Grave Homilies, and Lectures, But the flame
  Of thy brave Soule, that shot such heat and light,                15
  As burnt our earth, and made our darknesse bright,
  Committed holy Rapes upon our Will,
  Did through the eye the melting heart distill;
  And the deepe knowledge of darke truths so teach,
  As sense might judge, what phansie could not reach;               20
  Must be desir'd for ever. So the fire,
  That fills with spirit and heat the Delphique quire,
  Which kindled first by thy Promethean breath,
  Glow'd here a while, lies quench't now in thy death;
  The Muses garden with Pedantique weedes                           25
  O'rspred, was purg'd by thee; The lazie seeds
  Of servile imitation throwne away;
  And fresh invention planted, Thou didst pay
  The debts of our penurious bankrupt age;
  Licentious thefts, that make poëtique rage                        30
  A Mimique fury, when our soules must bee
  Possest, or with Anacreons Extasie,
  Or Pindars, not their owne; The subtle cheat
  Of slie Exchanges, and the jugling feat
  Of two-edg'd words, or whatsoever wrong                           35
  By ours was done the Greeke, or Latine tongue,
  Thou hast redeem'd, and open'd Us a Mine
  Of rich and pregnant phansie, drawne a line
  Of masculine expression, which had good
  Old Orpheus seene, Or all the ancient Brood                       40
  Our superstitious fooles admire, and hold
  Their lead more precious, then thy burnish't Gold,
  Thou hadst beene their Exchequer, and no more
  They each in others dust, had rak'd for Ore.
  Thou shalt yield no precedence, but of time,                      45
  And the blinde fate of language, whose tun'd chime
  More charmes the outward sense; Yet thou maist claime
  From so great disadvantage greater fame,
  Since to the awe of thy imperious wit
  Our stubborne language bends, made only fit                       50
  With her tough-thick-rib'd hoopes to gird about
  Thy Giant phansie, which had prov'd too stout
  For their soft melting Phrases. As in time
  They had the start, so did they cull the prime
  Buds of invention many a hundred yeare,                           55
  And left the rifled fields, besides the feare
  To touch their Harvest, yet from those bare lands
  Of what is purely thine, thy only hands
  (And that thy smallest worke) have gleaned more
  Then all those times, and tongues could reape before;             60
  But thou art gone, and thy strict lawes will be
  Too hard for Libertines in Poetrie.
  They will repeale the goodly exil'd traine
  Of gods and goddesses, which in thy just raigne
  Were banish'd nobler Poems, now, with these                       65
  The silenc'd tales o'th'Metamorphoses
  Shall stuffe their lines, and swell the windy Page,
  Till Verse refin'd by thee, in this last Age,
  Turne ballad rime, Or those old Idolls bee
  Ador'd againe, with new apostasie;                                70
  Oh, pardon mee, that breake with untun'd verse
  The reverend silence that attends thy herse,
  Whose awfull solemne murmures were to thee
  More then these faint lines, A loud Elegie,
  That did proclaime in a dumbe eloquence                           75
  The death of all the Arts, whose influence
  Growne feeble, in these panting numbers lies
  Gasping short winded Accents, and so dies:
  So doth the swiftly turning wheele not stand
  In th'instant we withdraw the moving hand,                        80
  But some small time maintaine a faint weake course
  By vertue of the first impulsive force:
  And so whil'st I cast on thy funerall pile
  Thy crowne of Bayes, Oh, let it crack a while,
  And spit disdaine, till the devouring flashes                     85
  Suck all the moysture up, then turne to ashes.
  I will not draw the envy to engrosse
  All thy perfections, or weepe all our losse;
  Those are too numerous for an Elegie,
  And this too great, to be express'd by mee.                       90
  Though every pen should share a distinct part,
  Yet art thou Theme enough to tyre all Art;
  Let others carve the rest, it shall suffice
  I on thy Tombe this Epitaph incise.

        _Here lies a King, that rul'd as hee thought fit            95
        The universall Monarchy of wit;
        Here lie two Flamens, and both those, the best,
        Apollo's first, at last, the true Gods Priest_.






_An Elegie on D^r. DONNE: By Sir Lucius Carie._

  Poets attend, the Elegie I sing
  Both of a doubly-named Priest, and King:
  In stead of Coates, and Pennons, bring your Verse,
  For you must bee chiefe mourners at his Hearse,
  A Tombe your Muse must to his Fame supply,                         5
  No other Monuments can never die;
  And as he was a two-fold Priest; in youth,
  Apollo's; afterwards, the voice of Truth,
  Gods Conduit-pipe for grace, who chose him for
  His extraordinary Embassador,                                     10
  So let his Liegiers with the Poets joyne,
  Both having shares, both must in griefe combine:
  Whil'st Johnson forceth with his Elegie
  Teares from a griefe-unknowing Scythians eye,
  (Like Moses at whose stroke the waters gusht                      15
  From forth the Rock, and like a Torrent rusht.)
  Let Lawd his funerall Sermon preach, and shew
  Those vertues, dull eyes were not apt to know,
  Nor leave that Piercing Theme, till it appeares
  To be goodfriday, by the Churches Teares;                         20
  Yet make not griefe too long oppresse our Powers,
  Least that his funerall Sermon should prove ours.
  Nor yet forget that heavenly Eloquence,
  With which he did the bread of life dispense,
  Preacher and Orator discharg'd both parts                         25
  With pleasure for our sense, health for our hearts,
  And the first such (Though a long studied Art
  Tell us our soule is all in every part,)
  None was so marble, but whil'st him he heares,
  His Soule so long dwelt only in his eares.                        30
  And from thence (with the fiercenesse of a flood
  Bearing downe vice) victual'd with that blest food
  Their hearts; His seed in none could faile to grow,
  Fertile he found them all, or made them so:
  No Druggist of the Soule bestow'd on all                          35
  So Catholiquely a curing Cordiall.
  Nor only in the Pulpit dwelt his store,
  His words work'd much, but his example more,
  That preach't on worky dayes, His Poetrie
  It selfe was oftentimes divinity,                                 40
  Those Anthemes (almost second Psalmes) he writ
  To make us know the Crosse, and value it,
  (Although we owe that reverence to that name
  Wee should not need warmth from an under flame.)
  Creates a fire in us, so neare extreme                            45
  That we would die, for, and upon this theme.
  Next, his so pious Litany, which none can
  But count Divine, except a Puritan,
  And that but for the name, nor this, nor those
  Want any thing of Sermons, but the prose.                         50
  Experience makes us see, that many a one
  Owes to his Countrey his Religion;
  And in another, would as strongly grow,
  Had but his Nurse and Mother taught him so,
  Not hee the ballast on his Judgement hung;                        55
  Nor did his preconceit doe either wrong;
  He labour'd to exclude what ever sinne
  By time or carelessenesse had entred in;
  Winnow'd the chaffe from wheat, but yet was loath
  A too hot zeale should force him, burne them both;                60
  Nor would allow of that so ignorant gall,
  Which to save blotting often would blot all;
  Nor did those barbarous opinions owne,
  To thinke the Organs sinne, and faction, none;
  Nor was there expectation to gaine grace                          65
  From forth his Sermons only, but his face;
  So Primitive a looke, such gravitie
  With humblenesse, and both with Pietie;
  So milde was Moses countenance, when he prai'd
  For them whose Satanisme his power gainsaid;                      70
  And such his gravitie, when all Gods band
  Receiv'd his word (through him) at second hand,
  Which joyn'd, did flames of more devotion move
  Then ever Argive Hellens could of love.
  Now to conclude, I must my reason bring,                          75
  Wherefore I call'd him in his title King,
  That Kingdome the Philosophers beleev'd
  To excell Alexanders, nor were griev'd
  By feare of losse (that being such a Prey
  No stronger then ones selfe can force away)                       80
  The Kingdome of ones selfe, this he enjoy'd,
  And his authoritie so well employ'd,
  That never any could before become
  So Great a Monarch, in so small a roome;
  He conquer'd rebell passions, rul'd them so,                      85
  As under-spheares by the first Mover goe,
  Banish't so farre their working, that we can
  But know he had some, for we knew him man.
  Then let his last excuse his first extremes,
  His age saw visions, though his youth dream'd dreams.             90






_On D^{r}._ DONNES _death_:

_By M^{r}._ Mayne _of Christ-Church in Oxford._

  Who shall presume to mourn thee, _Donne_, unlesse
  He could his teares in thy expressions dresse,
  And teach his griefe that reverence of thy Hearse,
  To weepe lines, learned, as thy Anniverse,
  A Poëme of that worth, whose every teare                           5
  Deserves the title of a severall yeare.
  Indeed so farre above its Reader, good,
  That wee are thought wits, when 'tis understood,
  There that blest maid to die, who now should grieve?
  After thy sorrow, 'twere her losse to live;                       10
  And her faire vertues in anothers line,
  Would faintly dawn, which are made Saints in thine.
  Hadst thou beene shallower, and not writ so high,
  Or left some new way for our pennes, or eye,
  To shed a funerall teare, perchance thy Tombe                     15
  Had not beene speechlesse, or our Muses dumbe;
  But now wee dare not write, but must conceale
  Thy Epitaph, lest we be thought to steale,
  For, who hath read thee, and discernes thy worth,
  That will not say, thy carelesse houres brought forth             20
  Fancies beyond our studies, and thy play
  Was happier, then our serious time of day?
  So learned was thy chance; thy haste had wit,
  And matter from thy pen flow'd rashly fit,
  What was thy recreation turnes our braine,                        25
  Our rack and palenesse, is thy weakest straine.
  And when we most come neere thee, 'tis our blisse
  To imitate thee, where thou dost amisse.
  Here light your muse, you that do onely thinke,
  And write, and are just Poëts, as you drinke,                     30
  In whose weake fancies wit doth ebbe and flow,
  Just as your recknings rise, that wee may know
  In your whole carriage of your worke, that here
  This flash you wrote in Wine, and this in Beere,
  This is to tap your Muse, which running long                      35
  Writes flat, and takes our eare not halfe so strong;
  Poore Suburbe wits, who, if you want your cup,
  Or if a Lord recover, are blowne up.
  Could you but reach this height, you should not need
  To make, each meale, a project ere you feed,                      40
  Nor walke in reliques, clothes so old and bare,
  As if left off to you from _Ennius_ were,
  Nor should your love, in verse, call Mistresse, those,
  Who are mine hostesse, or your whores in prose;
  From this Muse learne to Court, whose power could move            45
  A Cloystred coldnesse, or a Vestall love,
  And would convey such errands to their eare,
  That Ladies knew no oddes to grant and heare;
  But I do wrong thee, _Donne_, and this low praise
  Is written onely for thy yonger dayes.                            50
  I am not growne up, for thy riper parts,
  Then should I praise thee, through the Tongues, and Arts,
  And have that deepe Divinity, to know,
  What mysteries did from thy preaching flow,
  Who with thy words could charme thy audience,                     55
  That at thy sermons, eare was all our sense;
  Yet have I seene thee in the pulpit stand,
  Where wee might take notes, from thy looke, and hand;
  And from thy speaking action beare away
  More Sermon, then some teachers use to say.                       60
  Such was thy carriage, and thy gesture such,
  As could divide the heart, and conscience touch.
  Thy motion did confute, and wee might see
  An errour vanquish'd by delivery.
  Not like our Sonnes of Zeale, who to reforme                      65
  Their hearers, fiercely at the Pulpit storme,
  And beate the cushion into worse estate,
  Then if they did conclude it reprobate,
  Who can out pray the glasse, then lay about
  Till all Predestination be runne out.                             70
  And from the point such tedious uses draw,
  Their repetitions would make Gospell, Law.
  No, In such temper would thy Sermons flow,
  So well did Doctrine, and thy language show,
  And had that holy feare, as, hearing thee,                        75
  The Court would mend, and a good Christian bee.
  And Ladies though unhansome, out of grace,
  Would heare thee, in their unbought lookes, and face.
  More I could write, but let this crowne thine Urne,
  Wee cannot hope the like, till thou returne.                      80




_Upon M^r J. Donne, and his Poems._

  Who dares say thou art dead, when he doth see
    (Unburied yet) this living part of thee?
  This part that to thy beeing gives fresh flame,
    And though th'art _Donne_, yet will preserve thy name.
  Thy flesh (whose channels left their crimsen hew,                  5
    And whey-like ranne at last in a pale blew)
  May shew thee mortall, a dead palsie may
    Seise on't, and quickly turne it into clay;
  Which like the Indian earth, shall rise refin'd:
    But this great Spirit thou hast left behinde,                   10
  This Soule of Verse (in it's first pure estate)
    Shall live, for all the World to imitate,
  But not come neer, for in thy Fancies flight
    Thou dost not stoope unto the vulgar fight,
  But, hovering highly in the aire of Wit,                          15
    Hold'st such a pitch, that few can follow it;
  Admire they may. Each object that the Spring
    (Or a more piercing influence) doth bring
  T'adorne Earths face, thou sweetly did'st contrive
    To beauties elements, and thence derive                         20
  Unspotted Lillies white; which thou did'st set
    Hand in hand, with the veine-like Violet,
  Making them soft, and warme, and by thy power,
    Could'st give both life, and sense, unto a flower.
  The Cheries thou hast made to speake, will bee                    25
    Sweeter unto the taste, then from the tree.
  And (spight of winter stormes) amidst the snow
    Thou oft hast made the blushing Rose to grow.
  The Sea-nimphs, that the watry cavernes keepe,
    Have sent their Pearles and Rubies from the deepe               30
  To deck thy love, and plac'd by thee, they drew
    More lustre to them, then where first they grew.
  All minerals (that Earths full wombe doth hold
    Promiscuously) thou couldst convert to gold,
  And with thy flaming raptures so refine,                          35
    That it was much more pure then in the Mine.
  The lights that guild the night, if thou did'st say,
    They looke like eyes, those did out-shine the day;
  For there would be more vertue in such spells,
    Then in Meridians, or crosse Parallels:                         40
  What ever was of worth in this great Frame,
    That Art could comprehend, or Wit could name,
  It was thy theme for Beauty; thou didst see,
    Woman, was this faire Worlds Epitomie.
  Thy nimble _Satyres_ too, and every straine                       45
    (With nervy strength) that issued from thy brain,
  Will lose the glory of their owne cleare bayes,
    If they admit of any others praise.
  But thy diviner Poëms (whose cleare fire
    Purges all drosse away) shall by a Quire                        50
  Of Cherubims, with heavenly Notes be set
    (Where flesh and blood could ne'r attaine to yet)
  There purest Spirits sing such sacred Layes,
    In Panegyrique Alleluiaes.

  _Arth. Wilson._




_In memory of Doctor Donne: By M^{r} R. B._

  _Donne_ dead? 'Tis here reported true, though I
  Ne'r yet so much desir'd to heare a lye,
  'Tis too too true, for so wee finde it still,
  Good newes are often false, but seldome, ill:
  But must poore fame tell us his fatall day,                        5
  And shall we know his death, the common way,
  Mee thinkes some Comet bright should have foretold
  The death of such a man, for though of old
  'Tis held, that Comets Princes death foretell,
  Why should not his, have needed one as well?                      10
  Who was the Prince of wits, 'mongst whom he reign'd,
  High as a Prince, and as great State maintain'd?
  Yet wants he not his signe, for wee have seene
  A dearth, the like to which hath never beene,
  Treading on harvests heeles, which doth presage                   15
  The death of wit and learning, which this age
  Shall finde, now he is gone; for though there bee
  Much graine in shew, none brought it forth as he,
  Or men are misers; or if true want raises
  The dearth, then more that dearth _Donnes_ plenty praises.        20
  Of learning, languages, of eloquence,
  And Poësie, (past rauishing of sense,)
  He had a magazine, wherein such store
  Was laid up, as might hundreds serve of poore.
    But he is gone, O how will his desire                           25
  Torture all those that warm'd them by his fire?
  Mee thinkes I see him in the pulpit standing,
  Not eares, or eyes, but all mens hearts commanding,
  Where wee that heard him, to our selves did faine
  Golden Chrysostome was alive againe;                              30
  And never were we weari'd, till we saw
  His houre (and but an houre) to end did draw.
  How did he shame the doctrine-men, and use,
  With helps to boot, for men to beare th'abuse
  Of their tir'd patience, and endure th'expence                    35
  Of time, O spent in hearkning to non-sense,
  With markes also, enough whereby to know,
  The speaker is a zealous dunce, or so.
  'Tis true, they quitted him, to their poore power,
  They humm'd against him; And with face most sowre                 40
  Call'd him a strong lin'd man, a Macaroon,
  And no way fit to speake to clouted shoone,
  As fine words as you would desire,
  But verily, but a bad edifier.
  Thus did these beetles slight in him that good,                   45
  They could not see, and much lesse understood.
  But we may say, when we compare the stuffe
  Both brought; He was a candle, they the snuffe.
  Well, Wisedome's of her children justifi'd,
  Let therefore these poore fellowes stand aside;                   50
  Nor, though of learning he deserv'd so highly,
  Would I his booke should save him; Rather slily
  I should advise his Clergie not to pray,
  Though of the learn'dst sort; Me thinkes that they
  Of the same trade, are Judges not so fit,                         55
  There's no such emulation as of wit.
  Of such, the Envy might as much perchance
  Wrong him, and more, then th'others ignorance.
  It was his Fate (I know't) to be envy'd
  As much by Clerkes, as lay men magnifi'd;                         60
  And why? but 'cause he came late in the day,
  And yet his Penny earn'd, and had as they.
  No more of this, least some should say, that I
  Am strai'd to Satyre, meaning Elegie.
  No, no, had DONNE need to be judg'd or try'd,                     65
  A Jury I would summon on his side,
  That had no sides, nor factions, past the touch
  Of all exceptions, freed from Passion, such
  As nor to feare nor flatter, e'r were bred,
  These would I bring, though called from the dead:                 70
  Southampton, Hambleton, Pembrooke, Dorsets Earles,
  Huntingdon, Bedfords Countesses (the Pearles
  Once of each sexe.) If these suffice not, I
  Ten _decem tales_ have of Standers by:
  All which, for DONNE, would such a verdict give,                  75
  As can belong to none, that now doth live.
    But what doe I? A diminution 'tis
  To speake of him in verse, so short of his,
  Whereof he was the master; All indeed
  Compar'd with him, pip'd on an Oaten reed.                        80
  O that you had but one 'mongst all your brothers
  Could write for him, as he hath done for others:
  (Poets I speake to) When I see't, I'll say,
  My eye-sight betters, as my yeares decay,
  Meane time a quarrell I shall ever have                           85
  Against these doughty keepers from the grave,
  Who use, it seemes their old Authoritie,
  When (Verses men immortall make) they cry:
  Which had it been a Recipe true tri'd,
  _Probatum esset_, DONNE had never dy'd.                           90
    For mee, if e'r I had least sparke at all
  Of that which they Poetique fire doe call,
  Here I confesse it fetched from his hearth,
  Which is gone out, now he is gone to earth.
  This only a poore flash, a lightning is                           95
  Before my Muses death, as after his.
  Farewell (faire soule) and deigne receive from mee
  This Type of that devotion I owe thee,
  From whom (while living) as by voice and penne
  I learned more, then from a thousand men:                        100
  So by thy death, am of one doubt releas'd,
  And now beleeve that miracles are ceas'd.




_Epitaph._

  _Heere lies Deane Donne_; Enough; Those words alone
  Shew him as fully, as if all the stone
  His Church of Pauls contains, were through inscrib'd
  Or all the walkers there, to speake him, brib'd.
  None can mistake him, for one such as Hee                          5
  DONNE, Deane, or Man, more none shall ever see.
  Not man? No, though unto a Sunne each eye
  Were turn'd, the whole earth so to overspie.
  A bold brave word; Yet such brave Spirits as knew
  His Spirit, will say, it is lesse bold then true.                 10




_Epitaph upon D^r. Donne_,

By _Endy: Porter_.

  This decent Urne a sad inscription weares,
  Of _Donnes_ departure from us, to the spheares;
  And the dumbe stone with silence seemes to tell
  The changes of this life, wherein is well
  Exprest, A cause to make all joy to cease,                         5
  And never let our sorrowes more take ease;
  For now it is impossible to finde
  One fraught with vertues, to inrich a minde;
  But why should death, with a promiscuous hand
  At one rude stroke impoverish a land?                             10
  Thou strict Attorney, unto stricter Fate,
  Didst thou confiscate his life out of hate
  To his rare Parts? Or didst thou throw thy dart,
  With envious hand, at some Plebeyan heart;
  And he with pious vertue stept betweene                           15
  To save that stroke, and so was kill'd unseene
  By thee? O 'twas his goodnesse so to doe,
  Which humane kindnesse never reacht unto.
  Thus the hard lawes of death were satisfi'd,
  And he left us like Orphan friends, and di'de.                    20
  Now from the Pulpit to the peoples eares,
  Whose speech shall send repentant sighes, and teares?
  Or tell mee, if a purer Virgin die,
  Who shall hereafter write her Elegie?
  Poets be silent, let your numbers sleepe,                         25
  For he is gone that did all phansie keepe;
  Time hath no Soule, but his exalted verse;
  Which with amazements, we may now reherse.




  In obitum venerabilis viri _Iohannis Donne_, sacræ
  Theologiæ Doctoris, Ecclesiæ Cathedralis Divi _Pauli_,
  nuper Decani; Illi honoris, tibi (multum mihi colende
    Vir) observantiæ ergo Hæc ego.

  _Conquerar? ignavoque sequar tua funera planctu?
  Sed lachrimæ clausistis iter: nec muta querelas
  Lingua potest proferre pias: ignoscite manes
  Defuncti, & tacito finite indulgere dolori.
    Sed scelus est tacuisse: cadant in mœsta lituræ               5
  Verba. Tuis (docta umbra) tuis hæc accipe jussis
  Cæpta, nec officii contemnens pignora nostri
  Aversare tuâ non dignum laude Poëtam.
    O si Pythagoræ non vanum dogma fuisset:
  Inque meum â vestro migraret pectore pectus                       10
  Musa, repentinos tua nosceret urna furores.
  Sed frustra, heu frustra hæc votis puerilibus opto:
  Tecum abiit, summoque sedens jam monte Thalia
  Ridet anhelantes, Parnassi & culmina vates
  Desperare jubet. Verum hâc nolente coactos                        15
  Scribimus audaces numeros, & flebile carmen
  Scribimus (ô soli qui te dilexit) habendum.
    Siccine perpetuus liventia lumina somnus
  Clausit? & immerito merguntur funere virtus?
  Et pietas? & quæ poterant fecisse beatum,                         20
  Cætera, sed nec te poterant servare beatum.
    Quo mihi doctrinam? quorsum impallescere chartis
  Nocturnis juvat? & totidem olfecisse lucernas?
  Decolor & longos studiis deperdere Soles
  Vt prius aggredior, longamque arcessere famam.                    25
  Omnia sed frustra: mihi dum cunctisque minatur
  Exitium crudele & inexorabile fatum.
    Nam post te sperare nihil decet: hoc mihi restat
  Vt moriar, tenues fugiatque obscurus in auras
  Spiritus: ô doctis saltem si cognitus umbris.                     30
  Illic te (venerande) iterum, (venerande) videbo.
  Et dulces audire sonós, & verba diserti
  Oris, & æternas dabitur mihi carpere voces.
  Quêis ferus infernæ tacuisset Ianitor aulæ
  Auditis: Nilusque minus strepuisset: Arion                        35
  Cederet, & sylvas qui post se traxerat Orpheus.
  Eloquio sic ille viros, sic ille movere
  Voce feros potuit: quis enim tam barbarus? aut tam
  Facundis nimis infestus non motus ut illo
  Hortante, & blando victus sermone sileret?                        40
    Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat,
  Singula sic decuere senem, sic omnia. Vidi,
  Audivi & stupui quoties orator in Æde
  Paulina stetit, & mira gravitate levantes
  Corda, oculosque viros tenuit: dum Nestoris ille                  45
  Fudit verba (omni quanta mage dulcia melle?)
  Nunc habet attonitos, pandit mysteria plebi
  Non concessa prius nondum intellecta: revolvunt
  Mirantes, tacitique arrectis auribus astant.
    Mutatis mox ille modo, formaque loquendi                        50
  Tristia pertractat: fatumque & flebile mortis
  Tempus, & in cineres redeunt quod corpora primos.
  Tunc gemitum cunctos dare, tunc lugere videres,
  Forsitan à lachrymis aliquis non temperat, atque
  Ex oculis largum stillat rorem; ætheris illo                      55
  Sic pater audito voluit succumbere turbam,
  Affectusque ciere suos, & ponere notæ
  Vocis ad arbitrium, divinæ oracula mentis
  Dum narrat, rostrisque potens dominatur in altis.
    Quo feror? audaci & forsan pietate nocenti                      60
  In nimia ignoscas vati, qui vatibus olim
  Egregium decus, et tanto excellentior unus
  Omnibus; inferior quanto est, et pessimus, impar
  Laudibus hisce, tibi qui nunc facit ista Poëta.
  Et quo nos canimus? cur hæc tibi sacra? Poëtæ                     65
  Desinite: en fati certus, sibi voce canorâ
  Inferias præmisit olor, cum Carolus Albâ
  (Vltima volventem et Cycnæâ voce loquentem)
  Nuper eum, turba & magnatum audiret in Aulâ.
    Tunc Rex, tunc Proceres, Clerus, tunc astitit illi              70
  Aula frequens. Solâ nunc in tellure recumbit,
  Vermibus esca, pio malint nisi parcere: quidni
  Incipiant & amare famem? Metuere Leones
  Sic olim, sacrosque artus violare Prophetæ
  Bellua non ausa est qùamquam jejuna, sitimque                     75
  Optaret nimis humano satiare cruore.
    At non hæc de te sperabimus; omnia carpit
  Prædator vermis: nec talis contigit illi
  Præda diu; forsan metrico pede serpet ab inde:
   Vescere, & exhausto satia te sanguine. Iam nos                   80
  Adsumus; et post te cupiet quis vivere? Post te
  Quis volet, aut poterit? nam post te vivere mors est.
    Et tamen ingratas ignavi ducimus auras:
  Sustinet & tibi lingua vale, vale dicere: parce
  Non festinanti æternum requiescere turbæ.                         85
  Ipsa satis properat quæ nescit Parca morari,
  Nunc urgere colum, trahere atque occare videmus.
  Quin rursus (Venerande) Vale, vale: ordine nos te
  Quo Deus, & quo dura volet natura sequemur.
    Depositum interea lapides servate fideles.                      90
  Fœlices illâ quêis Ædis parte locari
  Quâ jacet iste datur. Forsan lapis inde loquetur,
  Parturietque viro plenus testantia luctus
  Verba: & carminibus quæ Donni suggeret illi
  Spiritus, insolitos testari voce calores                          95
  Incipiet: (non sic Pyrrhâ jactante calebat.)
    Mole sub hâc tegitur quicquid mortale relictum est
    De tanto mortale viro. Qui præfuit Ædi huic,
    Formosi pecoris pastor, formosior ipse.
    Ite igitur, dignisque illum celebrate loquelis,                100
    Et quæ demuntur vitæ date tempora famæ._

  Indignus tantorum meritorum Præco, virtutum
  tuarum cultor religiosissimus,

  DANIEL DARNELLY.





_Elegie on D. D._

  Now, by one yeare, time and our frailtie have
  Lessened our first confusion, since the Grave
  Clos'd thy deare Ashes, and the teares which flow
  In these, have no springs, but of solid woe:
  Or they are drops, which cold amazement froze                      5
  At thy decease, and will not thaw in Prose:
  All streames of Verse which shall lament that day,
  Doe truly to the Ocean tribute pay;
  But they have lost their saltnesse, which the eye
  In recompence of wit, strives to supply:                          10
  Passions excesse for thee wee need not feare,
  Since first by thee our passions hallowed were;
  Thou mad'st our sorrowes, which before had bin
  Onely for the Successe, sorrowes for sinne,
  We owe thee all those teares, now thou art dead,                  15
  Which we shed not, which for our selves we shed.
  Nor didst thou onely consecrate our teares,
  Give a religious tincture to our feares;
  But even our joyes had learn'd an innocence,
  Thou didst from gladnesse separate offence:                       20
  All mindes at once suckt grace from thee, as where
  (The curse revok'd) the Nations had one eare.
  Pious dissector: thy one houre did treate
  The thousand mazes of the hearts deceipt;
  Thou didst pursue our lov'd and subtill sinne,                    25
  Through all the foldings wee had wrapt it in,
  And in thine owne large minde finding the way
  By which our selves we from our selves convey,
  Didst in us, narrow models, know the same
  Angles, though darker, in our meaner frame.                       30
  How short of praise is this? My Muse, alas,
  Climbes weakly to that truth which none can passe,
  Hee that writes best, may onely hope to leave
  A Character of all he could conceive
  But none of thee, and with mee must confesse,                     35
  That fansie findes some checke, from an excesse
  Of merit most, of nothing, it hath spun,
  And truth, as reasons task and theame, doth shunne.
  She makes a fairer flight in emptinesse,
  Than when a bodied truth doth her oppresse.                       40
  Reason againe denies her scales, because
  Hers are but scales, shee judges by the lawes
  Of weake comparison, thy vertue sleights
  Her feeble Beame, and her unequall Weights.
  What prodigie of wit and pietie                                   45
  Hath she else knowne, by which to measure thee?
  Great soule: we can no more the worthinesse
  Of what you were, then what you are, expresse.

  _Sidney Godolphin._





_On D^{r}_ John Donne, _late Deane of S._ Paules, _London_.

  Long since this taske of teares from you was due,
  Long since, ô Poëts, he did die to you,
  Or left you dead, when wit and he tooke flight
  On divine wings, and soard out of your sight.
  Preachers, 'tis you must weep; The wit he taught                   5
  You doe enjoy; the Rebels which he brought
  From ancient discord, Giants faculties,
  And now no more religions enemies;
  Honest to knowing, unto vertuous sweet,
  Witty to good, and learned to discreet,                           10
  He reconcil'd, and bid the Vsurper goe;
  Dulnesse to vice, religion ought to flow;
  He kept his loves, but not his objects; wit
  Hee did not banish, but transplanted it,
  Taught it his place and use, and brought it home                  15
  To Pietie, which it doth best become;
  He shew'd us how for sinnes we ought to sigh,
  And how to sing Christs Epithalamy:
  The Altars had his fires, and there hee spoke
  Incense of loves, and fansies holy smoake:                        20
  Religion thus enrich'd, the people train'd,
  And God from dull vice had the fashion gain'd.
  The first effects sprung in the giddy minde
  Of flashy youth, and thirst of woman-kinde,
  By colours lead, and drawne to a pursuit,                         25
  Now once againe by beautie of the fruit,
  As if their longings too must set us free,
  And tempt us now to the commanded tree.
  Tell me, had ever pleasure such a dresse,
  Have you knowne crimes so shap'd? or lovelinesse                  30
  Such as his lips did cloth religion in?
  Had not reproofe a beauty passing sinne?
  Corrupted nature sorrow'd when she stood
  So neare the danger of becomming good,
  And wish'd our so inconstant eares exempt                         35
  From piety that had such power to tempt:
  Did not his sacred flattery beguile
  Man to amendment? The law, taught to smile,
  Pension'd our vanitie, and man grew well
  Through the same frailtie by which he fell.                       40
  O the sick state of man, health does not please
  Our tasts, but in the shape of the disease.
  Thriftlesse is charitie, coward patience,
  Iustice is cruell, mercy want of sense.
  What meanes our Nature to barre vertue place,                     45
  If shee doe come in her owne cloathes and face?
  Is good a pill, we dare not chaw to know?
  Sense the soules servant, doth it keep us so
  As we might starve for good, unlesse it first
  Doe leave a pawne of relish in the gust?                          50
  Or have we to salvation no tie
  At all, but that of our infirmitie?
  Who treats with us must our affections move
  To th' good we flie by those sweets which we love,
  Must seeke our palats, and with their delight                     55
  To gaine our deeds, must bribe our appetite.
  These traines he knew, and laying nets to save,
  Temptingly sugred all the health hee gave.
  But, where is now that chime? that harmony
  Hath left the world, now the loud organ may                       60
  Appeare, the better voyce is fled to have
  A thousand times the sweetnesse which it gave.
  I cannot say how many thousand spirits
  The single happinesse this soule inherits,
  Damnes in the other world, soules whom no crosse                  65
  O'th sense afflicts, but onely of the losse,
  Whom ignorance would halfe save, all whose paine
  Is not in what they feele, but others gaine,
  Selfe executing wretched spirits, who
  Carrying their guilt, transport their envy too:                   70
  But those high joyes which his wits youngest flame
  Would hurt to chuse, shall not we hurt to name?
  Verse statues are all robbers, all we make
  Of monument, thus doth not give but take
  As Sailes which Seamen to a forewinde fit,                        75
  By a resistance, goe along with it,
  So pens grow while they lessen fame so left;
  A weake assistance is a kinde of theft.
  Who hath not love to ground his teares upon,
  Must weep here if he have ambition.

  _I. Chudleigh._






  A Sheafe of Snakes used heretofore to be
  My Seal, The Crest of our poore Family.
  Adopted in Gods Family, and so
  Our old Coat lost, unto new armes I go.
  The Crosse (my seal at Baptism) spred below,                       5
  Does, by that form, into an Anchor grow.
  Crosses grow Anchors; Bear, as thou shouldst do
  Thy Crosse, and that Crosse grows an Anchor too.
  But he that makes our Crosses Anchors thus,
  Is Christ, who there is crucifi'd for us.                         10
  Yet may I, with this, my first Serpents hold,
  God gives new blessings, and yet leaves the old;
  The Serpent, may, as wise, my pattern be;
  My poison, as he feeds on dust, that's me.
  And as he rounds the Earth to murder sure,                        15
  My death he is, but on the Crosse, my cure.
  Crucifie nature then, and then implore
  All Grace from him, crucified there before;
  When all is Crosse, and that Crosse Anchor grown,
  This Seal's a Catechism, not a Seal alone.                        20
  Under that little Seal great gifts I send,
  <Wishes,> and prayers, pawns, and fruits of a friend.
  And may that Saint which rides in our great Seal,
  To you, who bear his name, great bounties deal.




Translated out of _Gazæus_, _Vota Amico facta_. _fol._ 160.

  God grant thee thine own wish, and grant thee mine,
  Thou, who dost, best friend, in best things outshine;
  May thy soul, ever chearfull, nere know cares,
  Nor thy life, ever lively, know gray haires.
  Nor thy hand, ever open, know base holds,                          5
  Nor thy purse, ever plump, know pleits, or folds.
  Nor thy tongue, ever true, know a false thing,
  Nor thy word, ever mild, know quarrelling.
  Nor thy works, ever equall, know disguise,
  Nor thy fame, ever pure, know contumelies.                        10
  Nor thy prayers, know low objects, still Divine;
  God grant thee thine own wish, and grant thee mine.

   

I.


POEMS

PROBABLY BY SIR JOHN ROE, KNT.

_To S^{r} Nicholas Smyth._

  Sleep, next Society and true friendship,
  Mans best contentment, doth securely slip
  His passions and the worlds troubles. Rock me
  O sleep, wean'd from my dear friends company,
  In a cradle free from dreams or thoughts, there                    5
  Where poor men ly, for Kings asleep do fear.
  Here sleeps House by famous Ariosto,
  By silver-tongu'd Ovid, and many moe,
  Perhaps by golden-mouth'd Spencer too pardie,
  (Which builded was some dozen Stories high)                       10
  I had repair'd, but that it was so rotten,
  As sleep awak'd by Ratts from thence was gotten:
  And I will build no new, for by my Will,
  Thy fathers house shall be the fairest still
  In Excester. Yet, methinks, for all their Wit,                    15
  Those wits that say nothing, best describe it.
  Without it there is no Sense, only in this
  Sleep is unlike a long Parenthesis.
  Not to save charges, but would I had slept
  The time I spent in London, when I kept                           20
  Fighting and untrust gallants Company,
  In which Natta, the new Knight, seized on me,
  And offered me the experience he had bought
  With great Expence. I found him throughly taught
  In curing Burnes. His thing hath had more scars                   25
  Then Things himselfe; like Epps it often wars,
  And still is hurt. For his Body and State
  The Physick and Counsel which came too late,
  'Gainst Whores and Dice, hee nowe on mee bestowes
  Most superficially: hee speaks of those                           30
  (I found by him) least soundly who most knows:
  He swears well, speakes ill, but best of Clothes,
  What fits Summer, what Winter, what the Spring.
  He had Living, but now these waies come in
  His whole Revenues. Where each Whore now dwells,                  35
  And hath dwelt, since his fathers death, he tells.
  Yea he tells most cunningly each hid cause
  Why Whores forsake their Bawds. To these some Laws
  He knows of the Duello, and touch his Skill
  The least lot in that or those he quarrell will,                  40
  Though sober; but so never fought. I know
  What made his Valour, undubb'd, Windmill go,
  Within a Pint at most: yet for all this
  (Which is most strange) Natta thinks no man is
  More honest than himself. Thus men may want                       45
  Conscience, whilst being brought up ignorant,
  They use themselves to vice. And besides those
  Illiberal Arts forenam'd, no Vicar knows,
  Nor other Captain less then he; His Schools
  Are Ordinaries, where civil men seem fools,                       50
  Or are for being there; His best bookes, Plaies,
  Where, meeting godly Scenes, perhaps he praies.
  His first set prayer was for his father, ill
  And sick, that he might dye: That had, until
  The Lands were gone, he troubled God no more:                     55
  And then ask'd him but his Right, That the whore
  Whom he had kept, might now keep him: She spent,
  They left each other on even terms; she went
  To Bridewel, he unto the Wars, where want
  Hath made him valiant, and a Lieutenant                           60
  He is become: Where, as they pass apace,
  He steps aside, and for his Captains place
  He praies again: Tells God, he will confess
  His sins, swear, drink, dice and whore thenceforth less,
  On this Condition, that his Captain dye                           65
  And he succeed; But his Prayer did not; They
  Both cashir'd came home, and he is braver now
  Than'his captain: all men wonder, few know how.
  Can he rob? No. Cheat? No. Or doth he spend
  His own? No. Fidus, he is thy dear friend,                        70
  That keeps him up. I would thou wert thine own,
  Or thou'hadst as good a friend as thou art one.
  No present Want nor future hope made me,
  Desire (as once I did) thy friend to be:
  But he had cruelly possest thee then,                             75
  And as our Neighbours the Low-Country men,
  Being (whilst they were Loyal, with Tyranny
  Opprest) broke loose, have since refus'd to be
  Subject to good Kings, I found even so,
  Wer't thou well rid of him, thou't have no moe.                   80
  Could'st thou but chuse as well as love, to none
  Thou should'st be second: Turtle and Damon
  Should give thee place in songs, and Lovers sick
  Should make thee only Loves Hieroglyphick:
  Thy Impress should be the loving Elm and Vine,                    85
  Where now an ancient Oak, with Ivy twine
  Destroy'd, thy Symbol is. O dire Mischance!
  And, O vile verse! And yet your Abraham France
  Writes thus, and jests not. Good Fidus for this
  Must pardon me, Satyres bite when they kiss.                      90
  But as for Natta, we have since faln out:
  Here on his knees he pray'd, else we had fought.
  And because God would not he should be winner,
  Nor yet would have the Death of such a sinner,
  At his seeking, our Quarrel is deferr'd,                          95
  I'll leave him at his Prayers, and (as I heard)
  His last; Fidus, and you, and I do know,
  I was his friend, and durst have been his foe,
  And would be either yet; But he dares be
  Neither; Sleep blots him out and takes in thee.                  100
  "The mind, you know is like a Table-book,
  Which, th'old unwipt, new writing never took.
  Hear how the Huishers Checques, Cupbord and Fire
  I pass'd; by which Degrees young men aspire
  In Court; And how that idle and she-state,                       105
  Whenas my judgment cleer'd, my soul did hate;
  How I found there (if that my trifling Pen
  Durst take so hard a Task) Kings were but men,
  And by their Place more noted, if they erre;
  How they and their Lords unworthy men prefer;                    110
  And, as unthrifts had rather give away
  Great Summs to flatterers, than small debts pay,
  So they their weakness hide, and greatness show,
  By giving them that which to worth they owe:
  What Treason is, and what did Essex kill,                        115
  Not true Treason, but Treason handled ill;
  And which of them stood for their Countries good,
  Or what might be the Cause of so much Blood.
  He said she stunck, and men might not have said
  That she was old before that she was dead.                       120
  His Case was hard, to do or suffer; loth
  To do, he made it harder, and did both.
  Too much preparing lost them all their Lives,
  Like some in Plagues kill'd with preservatives.
  Friends, like land-souldiers in a storm at Sea,                  125
  Not knowing what to do, for him did pray.
  They told it all the world; where was their wit?
  Cuffs putting on a sword, might have told it.
  And Princes must fear Favorites more then Foes,
  For still beyond Revenge Ambition goes.                          130
  How since Her death, with Sumpter-horse that Scot
  Hath rid, who, at his coming up, had not
  A Sumpter-dog. But till that I can write
  Things worth thy Tenth reading (dear Nick) goodnight.




_Satyre._

  Men write that love and reason disagree,
  But I ne'r saw't exprest as 'tis in thee.
  Well, I may lead thee, God must make thee see,
  But, thine eyes blinde too, there's no hope for thee.
  Thou say'st shee's wise and witty, faire and free,                 5
  All these are reasons why she should scorne thee.
  Thou dost protest thy love, and wouldst it shew
  By matching her as she would match her foe:
  And wouldst perswade her to a worse offence,
  Then that whereof thou didst accuse her wench.                    10
  Reason there's none for thee, but thou may'st vexe
  Her with example. Say, for feare her sexe
  Shunne her, she needs must change; I doe not see
  How reason e'r can bring that _must_ to thee.
  Thou art a match a Iustice to rejoyce,                            15
  Fit to be his, and not his daughters choyce.
  Urg'd with his threats shee'd scarcely stay with thee,
  And wouldst th'have this to chuse thee, being free?
  Goe then and punish some soone-gotten stuffe,
  For her dead husband this hath mourn'd enough,                    20
  In hating thee. Thou maist one like this meet;
  For spight take her, prove kinde, make thy breath sweet,
  Let her see she hath cause, and to bring to thee
  Honest children, let her dishonest bee.
  If shee be a widow, I'll warrant her                              25
  Shee'll thee before her first husband preferre,
  And will wish thou hadst had her maidenhead;
  Shee'll love thee so, for then thou hadst bin dead.
  But thou such strong love, and weake reasons hast,
  Thou must thrive there, or ever live disgrac'd.                   30
  Yet pause a while; and thou maist live to see
  A time to come, wherein she may beg thee;
  If thou'lt not pause nor change, she'll beg thee now.
  Doe what she can, love for nothing shee'll allow.
  Besides, her<s> were too much gaine and merchandise,              35
  And when thou art rewarded, desert dies.
  Now thou hast odds of him she loves, he may doubt
  Her constancy, but none can put thee out.
  Againe, be thy love true, shee'll prove divine,
  And in the end the good on't will be thine:                       40
  For thou must never think on other love,
  And so wilt advance her as high above
  Vertue as cause above effect can bee:
  'Tis vertue to be chast, which shee'll make thee.



AN ELEGIE.

_Reflecting on his passion for his mistrisse._

  Come, Fates; I feare you not. All whom I owe
  Are paid, but you. Then rest me ere I goe.
  But, Chance from you all soveraignty hath got,
  Love woundeth none but those whom death dares not;
  Else, if you were, and just, in equitie                            5
  I should have vanquish'd her, as you did me.
  Else Lovers should not brave death's pains, and live,
  But 'tis a rule, _Death comes not to relieve_.
  Or, pale and wan deaths terrours, are they lay'd
  So deepe in Lovers, they make death afraid?                       10
  Or (the least comfort) have I company?
  Orecame she Fates, Love, Death, as well as mee?
    Yes, Fates doe silke unto her distaffe pay,
  For their ransome, which taxe on us they laye.
  Love gives her youth, which is the reason why                     15
  Youths, for her sake, some wither and some die.
  Poore Death can nothing give; yet, for her sake,
  Still in her turne, he doth a Lover take:
  And if Death should prove false, she feares him not;
  Our Muses, to redeeme her she hath got.                           20
  That fatall night wee last kiss'd, I thus pray'd,
  Or rather, thus despair'd; I should have said:
  Kisses, and yet despaire? The forbid tree
  Did promise (and deceive) no more then shee.
  Like Lambs that see their teats, and must eat Hay,                25
  A food, whose tast hath made me pine away.
  _Dives_, when thou saw'st blisse, and crav'dst to touch
  A drop of water, thy great paines were such.
  Here griefe wants a fresh wit, for mine being spent,
  And my sighes weary, groanes are all my rent;                     30
  Vnable longer to indure the paine,
  They breake like thunder, and doe bring down rain.
  Thus, till dry teares soulder mine eyes, I weepe;
  And then, I dreame, how you securely sleepe,
  And in your dreames doe laugh at me. I hate,                      35
  And pray Love, All may: He pitties my state,
  But sayes, I therein no revenge should finde;
  The Sunne would shine, though all the world were blind.
  Yet, to trie my hate, Love shew'd me your teare;
  And I had dy'd, had not your smile beene there.                   40
  Your frowne undoes me; your smile is my wealth;
  And as you please to looke, I have my health.
  Me thought, Love pittying me, when he saw this,
  Gave me your hands, the backs and palmes to kisse.
  That cur'd me not, but to beare paine gave strength,              45
  And what it lost in force, it tooke in length.
  I call'd on Love againe, who fear'd you so,
  That his compassion still prov'd greater woe;
  For, then I dream'd I was in bed with you,
  But durst not feele, for feare't should not prove true.           50
  This merits not your anger, had it beene,
  The Queene of Chastitie was naked seene;
  And in bed, not to feele, the paine I tooke,
  Was more then for _Actæon_ not to looke.
  And that brest which lay ope, I did not know,                     55
  But for the clearnesse, from a lump of snowe,
  Nor that sweet teat which on the top it bore
  From the rose-bud, which for my sake you wore.
  These griefs to issue forth, by verse, I prove,
  Or turne their course, by travaile, or new love:                  60
  All would not doe. The best at last I tryde:
  Unable longer to hould out I dyed.
  And then I found I lost life, death by flying:
  Who hundreds live are but soe long a dying.
  Charon did let me passe: I'le him requite.                        65
  To marke the groves or shades wrongs my delight.
  I'le speake but of those ghosts I found alone,
  Those thousand ghosts, whereof myself made one,
  All images of thee. I ask'd them, why?
  The Judge told me, all they for thee did dye,                     70
  And therefore had for their Elisian blisse,
  In one another their owne Loves to kisse.
  O here I miss'd not blisse, but being dead;
  For loe, I dream'd, I dream'd; and waking said,
  Heaven, if who are in thee there must dwell,                      75
  How is't, I now was there, and now I fell.



_An Elegie to M^{ris} Boulstred_: 1602.

  Shall I goe force an Elegie? abuse
  My witt? and breake the Hymen of my muse
  For one poore houres love? Deserves it such
  Which serves not me, to doe on her as much?
  Or if it could, I would that fortune shunn:                        5
  Who would be rich, to be foe foone undone?
  The beggars best is, wealth he doth not know;
  And but to shew it him, encreases woe.
  But we two may enjoye an hour? when never
  It returnes, who would have a losse for ever?                     10
  Nor can so short a love, if true, but bring
  A halfe howres feare, with the thought of losing:
  Before it, all howres were hope; and all are
  (That shall come after it,) yeares of dispaire.
  This joye brings this doubt, whether it were more                 15
  To have enjoy'd it, or have died before?
  T'is a lost paradise, a fall from grace,
  Which I thinke, Adam felt more then his race.
  Nor need those angells any other Hell;
  It is enough for them, from Heaven they fell.                     20
  Besides, Conquest in love is all in all;
  That when I liste, shee under me may fall:
  And for this turne, both for delight and view,
  I'le have a Succuba, as good as you.
  But when these toyes are past, and hott blood ends,               25
  The best enjoying is, we still are frends.
  Love can but be frendshipps outside; their two
  Beauties differ, as myndes and bodies do.
  Thus, I this great Good still would be to take,
  Vnless one houre, another happy make:                             30
  Or, that I might forgett it instantlie;
  Or in that blest estate, that I might die.
  But why doe I thus travaile in the skill
  Of despis'd poetrie, and perchance spill
  My fortune? or undoe myself in sport                              35
  By having but that dangerous name in Court?
  I'le leave, and since I doe your poet prove,
  Keep you my lines as secret as my Love.


_An Elegie._

  True Love findes witt, but he whose witt doth move
  Him to love, confesses he doth not love:
  And from his witt, passions and true desire
  Are forc'd as hard, as from the flint is fire.
  My love's all fire whose flames my soule do nurse,                 5
  Whose smokes are sighes; whose every sparke's a verse.
  Doth measure women win? Then I know why
  Most of our Ladies with the Scotts doe lie.
  A Scott is measur'd in each syllable, terse
  And smooth as a verse: and like that smooth verse                 10
  Is shallow, and wants matter, but in his handes,
  And they are rugged; Her state better standes
  Whom dauncing measures tempted, not the Scott:
  In brief she's out of measure, lost, soe gott.
  Greene-sickness wenches, (not needes must but) may                15
  Looke pale, breathe short; at Court none so long stay.
  Good witt ne're despair'd there, or _Ay me_ said:
  For never Wench at Court was ravished.
  And shee but cheates on Heaven, whom you so winne
  Thinking to share the sport, but not the sinne.                   20




_Song._

  Deare Love, continue nice and chaste,
  For, if you yeeld you doe me wrong,
  Let duller wits to loves end haste,
  I have enough to wooe thee long.

  All paine and joy is in their way;                                 5
  The things we feare bring lesse annoy
  Then feare; and hope brings greater joy;
  But in themselves they cannot stay.

  Small favours will my prayers increase;
  Granting my suit you give me all,                                 10
  And then my prayers must needs surcease,
  For, I have made your Godhead fall.

  Beasts cannot witt nor beauty see,
  They mans affections onely move;
  Beasts other sports of love doe prove,                            15
  With better feeling farre than we.

  Then Love prolong my suite, for thus
  By losing sport, I sport doe win;
  And that may vertue prove in us,
  Which ever yet hath beene a sinne.                                20

  My comming neare may spie some ill,
  And now the world is given to scoffe;
  To keepe my Love, (then) keepe me off,
  And so I shall admire thee still.

  Say I have made a perfect choyce,                                 25
  Satietie our Love may kill;
  Then give me but thy face and voyce,
  Mine eye and eare thou canst not fill.

  To make me rich (oh) be not poore,
  Give me not all, yet something lend,                              30
  So I shall still my suite commend,
  And you at will doe lesse or more.
    But, if to all you condescend,
    My love, our sport, your Godhead end.




_To Ben. Iohnson_, 6 _Ian._ 1603.

  The State and mens affaires are the best playes
  Next yours; 'Tis nor more nor lesse than due praise.
  Write, but touch not the much descending race
  Of Lords houses, so settled in worths place,
  As but themselves none thinke them usurpers.                       5
  It is no fault in thee to suffer theirs.
  If the Queene Masque, or King a hunting goe,
  Though all the Court follow, Let them. We know
  Like them in goodnesse that Court ne'r will be,
  For that were vertue, and not flatterie.                          10
  Forget we were thrust out; It is but thus,
  God threatens Kings, Kings Lords, as Lords doe us.
  Iudge of strangers, Trust and believe your friend,
  And so me; And when I true friendship end,
  With guilty conscience let me be worse stonge,                    15
  Then with _Pophams_ sentence theeves, or _Cookes_ tongue
  Traitors are. Friends are our selves. This I thee tell
  As to my friend, and to my selfe as Counsell;
  Let for a while the times unthrifty rout
  Contemne learning, and all your studies flout.                    20
  Let them scorne Hell, they will a Sergeant feare,
  More then wee _that_; ere long God may forbeare,
  But Creditors will not. Let them increase
  In riot and excesse as their meanes cease;
  Let them scorne him that made them, and still shun                25
  His Grace, but love the whore who hath undone
  Them and their soules. But; that they that allow
  But one God, should have religions enow
  For the Queens Masque, and their husbands, far more
  Then all the Gentiles knew, or _Atlas_ bore!                      30
  Well, let all passe, and trust him who nor cracks
  The bruised Reed, nor quencheth smoaking flaxe.




_To Ben. Iohnson_, 9. _Novembris_, 1603.

  If great men wrong me, I will spare my selfe;
  If meane, I will spare them. I know that pelf
  Which is ill got the Owner doth upbraid.
  It may corrupt a Iudge, make me afraid
  And a Iury; But 'twill revenge in this,                            5
  That, though himselfe be judge, hee guilty is.
  What care I though of weaknesse men taxe me,
  I had rather sufferer than doer be.
  That I did trust, it was my Natures praise,
  For breach of word I knew but as a phrase.                        10
  That judgement is, that surely can comprise
  The world in precepts, most happy and most wise.
  What though? Though lesse, yet some of both have we,
  Who have learn'd it by use and misery.
  Poore I, whom every pety crosse doth trouble,                     15
  Who apprehend each hurt thats done me, double,
  Am of this (though it should sinke me) carelesse,
  It would but force me to a stricter goodnesse.
  They have great odds of me, who gaine doe winne,
  (If such gaine be not losse) from every sinne.                    20
  The standing of great mens lives would afford
  A pretty summe, if God would sell his Word.
  He cannot; they can theirs, and breake them too.
  How unlike they are that they are likened to?
  Yet I conclude, they are amidst my evils,                         25
  If good, like Gods, the naught are so like devils.



_To S^{r} Tho. Roe_ 1603.

  _Deare Thom_:

  Tell her if she to hired servants shew
  Dislike, before they take their leave they goe;
  When nobler spirits start at no disgrace,
  For who hath but one minde, hath but one face:
  If then why I tooke not my leave she aske,                         5
  Aske her againe why she did not unmaske?
  Was she or proud or cruell, or knew shee
  'Twould make my losse more felt, and pittyed me?
  Or did she feare one kisse might stay for moe?
  Or else was she unwilling I should goe?                           10
  I thinke the best, and love so faithfully
  I cannot chuse but thinke that she loves mee.
  If this prove not my faith, then let her trie
  How in her service I would fructifie.
  Ladies have boldly lov'd; bid her renew                           15
  That decay'd worth, and prove the times past true.
  Then he whose wit and verse goes now so lame,
  With songs to her will the wild Irish tame.
  Howe'r, I'll weare the black and white ribband,
  White for her fortunes, blacke for mine shall stand.              20
  I doe esteeme her favours, not their stuffe;
  If what I have was given, I have enough:
  And all's well; for had she lov'd, I had had
  All my friends hate; for now, departing sad
  I feele not that; Yet as the Rack the Gout                        25
  Cures, so hath _this_ worse griefe _that_ quite put out:
  My first disease nought but that worse cureth,
  Which (which I dare foresee) nought cures but death.
  Tell her all this before I am forgot,
  That not too late shee grieve shee lov'd me not.                  30
    Burden'd with this, I was to depart lesse
    Willing, then those which die, and not confesse.


II.


_To the Countesse of Huntington._

  That unripe side of earth, that heavy clime
  That gives us man up now, like _Adams_ time
  Before he ate; mans shape, that would yet bee
  (Knew they not it, and fear'd beasts companie)
  So naked at this day, as though man there                          5
  From Paradise so great a distance were,
  As yet the newes could not arrived bee
  Of _Adams_ tasting the forbidden tree;
  Depriv'd of that free state which they were in,
  And wanting the reward, yet beare the sinne.                      10
    But, as from extreme hights who downward looks,
  Sees men at childrens shapes, Rivers at brookes,
  And loseth younger formes; so, to your eye,
  These (Madame) that without your distance lie,
  Must either mist, or nothing seeme to be,                         15
  Who are at home but wits mere _Atomi_.
  But, I who can behold them move, and stay,
  Have found my selfe to you, just their midway;
  And now must pitty them; for, as they doe
  Seeme sick to me, just so must I to you.                          20
  Yet neither will I vexe your eyes to see
  A sighing Ode, nor crosse-arm'd Elegie.
  I come not to call pitty from your heart,
  Like some white-liver'd dotard that would part
  Else from his slipperie soule with a faint groane,                25
  And faithfully, (without you smil'd) were gone.
  I cannot feele the tempest of a frowne,
  I may be rais'd by love, but not throwne down.
  Though I can pittie those sigh twice a day,
  I hate that thing whispers it selfe away.                         30
  Yet since all love is fever, who to trees
  Doth talke, doth yet in loves cold ague freeze.
  'Tis love, but, with such fatall weaknesse made,
  That it deftroyes it selfe with its owne shade.
  Who first look'd sad, griev'd, pin'd, and shew'd his paine,       35
  Was he that first taught women, to disdaine.
    As all things were one nothing, dull and weake,
  Vntill this raw disordered heape did breake,
  And severall desires led parts away,
  Water declin'd with earth, the ayre did stay,                     40
  Fire rose, and each from other but unty'd,
  Themselves unprison'd were and purify'd:
  So was love, first in vast confusion hid,
  An unripe willingnesse which nothing did,
  A thirst, an Appetite which had no ease,                          45
  That found a want, but knew not what would please.
  What pretty innocence in those dayes mov'd?
  Man ignorantly walk'd by her he lov'd;
  Both sigh'd and enterchang'd a speaking eye,
  Both trembled and were sick, both knew not why.                   50
  That naturall fearefulnesse that struck man dumbe,
  Might well (those times consider'd) man become.
  As all discoverers whose first assay
  Findes but the place, after, the nearest way:
  So passion is to womans love, about,                              55
  Nay, farther off, than when we first set out.
  It is not love that sueth, or doth contend;
  Love either conquers, or but meets a friend.
  Man's better part consists of purer fire,
  And findes it selfe allow'd, ere it desire.                       60
  Love is wise here, keepes home, gives reason sway,
  And journeys not till it finde summer-way.
  A weather-beaten Lover but once knowne,
  Is sport for every girle to practise on.
  Who strives through womans scornes, women to know,                65
  Is lost, and seekes his shadow to outgoe;
  It must bee sicknesse, after one disdaine,
  Though he be call'd aloud, to looke againe.
  Let others sigh, and grieve; one cunning sleight
  Shall freeze my Love to Christall in a night.                     70
  I can love first, and (if I winne) love still;
  And cannot be remov'd, unlesse she will.
  It is her fault if I unsure remaine,
  Shee onely can untie, and binde againe.
  The honesties of love with ease I doe,                            75
  But am no porter for a tedious woo.
    But (madame) I now thinke on you; and here
  Where we are at our hights, you but appeare,
  We are but clouds you rise from, our noone-ray
  But a foule shadow, not your breake of day.                       80
  You are at first hand all that's faire and right,
  And others good reflects but backe your light.
  You are a perfectnesse, so curious hit,
  That youngest flatteries doe scandall it.
  For, what is more doth what you are restraine,                    85
  And though beyond, is downe the hill againe.
  We'have no next way to you, we crosse to it:
  You are the straight line, thing prais'd, attribute;
  Each good in you's a light; so many a shade
  You make, and in them are your motions made.                      90
  These are your pictures to the life. From farre
  We see you move, and here your _Zani's_ are:
  So that no fountaine good there is, doth grow
  In you, but our dimme actions faintly shew.
    Then finde I, if mans noblest part be love,                     95
  Your purest luster must that shadow move.
  The soule with body, is a heaven combin'd
  With earth, and for mans ease, but nearer joyn'd.
  Where thoughts the starres of soule we understand,
  We guesse not their large natures, but command.                  100
  And love in you, that bountie is of light,
  That gives to all, and yet hath infinite.
  Whose heat doth force us thither to intend,
  But soule we finde too earthly to ascend,
  'Till slow accesse hath made it wholy pure,                      105
  Able immortall clearnesse to endure.
  Who dare aspire this journey with a staine,
  Hath waight will force him headlong backe againe.
  No more can impure man retaine and move
  In that pure region of a worthy love:                            110
  Then earthly substance can unforc'd aspire,
  And leave his nature to converse with fire:
  Such may have eye, and hand; may sigh, may speak;
  But like swoln bubles, when they are high'st they break.
    Though far removed Northerne fleets scarce finde               115
  The Sunnes comfort; others thinke him too kinde.
  There is an equall distance from her eye,
  Men perish too farre off, and burne too nigh.
  But as ayre takes the Sunne-beames equall bright
  From the first Rayes, to his last opposite:                      120
  So able men, blest with a vertuous Love,
  Remote or neare, or howsoe'r they move;
  Their vertue breakes all clouds that might annoy,
  There is no Emptinesse, but all is Ioy.
  He much profanes whom violent heats do move                      125
  To stile his wandring rage of passion, _Love_:
  Love that imparts in every thing delight,
  Is fain'd, which only tempts mans appetite.
  Why love among the vertues is not knowne
  Is, that love is them all contract in one.                       130



III.


_Elegie._

  Death be not proud, thy hand gave not this blow,
  Sinne was her captive, whence thy power doth flow;
  The executioner of wrath thou art,
  But to destroy the just is not thy part.
  Thy comming, terrour, anguish, griefe denounce;                    5
  Her happy state, courage, ease, joy pronounce.
  From out the Christall palace of her breast,
  The clearer soule was call'd to endlesse rest,
  (Not by the thundering voyce, wherewith God threats,
  But, as with crowned Saints in heaven he treats,)                 10
  And, waited on by Angels, home was brought,
  To joy that it through many dangers sought;
  The key of mercy gently did unlocke
  The doores 'twixt heaven and it, when life did knock.
    Nor boast, the fairest frame was made thy prey,                 15
  Because to mortall eyes it did decay;
  A better witnesse than thou art, assures,
  That though dissolv'd, it yet a space endures;
  No dramme thereof shall want or losse sustaine,
  When her best soule inhabits it again.                            20
  Goe then to people curst before they were,
  Their spoyles in Triumph of thy conquest weare.
  Glory not thou thy selfe in these hot teares
  Which our face, not for hers, but our harme weares,
  The mourning livery given by Grace, not thee,                     25
  Which wils our soules in these streams washt should be,
  And on our hearts, her memories best tombe,
  In this her Epitaph doth write thy doome.
  Blinde were those eyes, saw not how bright did shine
  Through fleshes misty vaile the beames divine.                    30
  Deafe were the eares, not charm'd with that sweet sound
  Which did i'th spirit-instructed voice abound.
  Of flint the conscience, did not yeeld and melt,
  At what in her last Act: it saw, heard, felt.
    Weep not, nor grudge then, to have lost her sight,              35
  Taught thus, our after stay's but a short night:
  But by all soules not by corruption choaked
  Let in high rais'd notes that power be invoked.
  Calme the rough seas, by which she sayles to rest,
  From sorrowes here, to a kingdome ever blest;                     40
  And teach this hymne of her with joy, and sing,
    _The grave no conquest gets, Death hath no sting._



IV.


_Psalme 137._

Probably by Francis Davison.

I.

  By Euphrates flowry side
              We did bide,
  From deare Juda farre absented,
  Tearing the aire with our cryes,
              And our eyes,                                          5
  With their streames his streame augmented.

II.

  When, poore Syons dolefull state,
              Desolate;
  Sacked, burned, and inthrall'd,
  And the Temple spoil'd, which wee                                 10
              Ne'r should see,
  To our mirthlesse mindes wee call'd:

III.

  Our mute harpes, untun'd, unstrung,
              Up wee hung
  On greene willowes neere beside us,                               15
  Where, we sitting all forlorne;
              Thus, in scorne,
  Our proud spoylers 'gan deride us.

IV.

  Come, sad Captives, leave your moanes,
          And your groanes                                          20
  Under Syons ruines bury;
  Tune your harps, and sing us layes
          In the praise
  Of your God, and let's be merry.

V.

  Can, ah, can we leave our moanes?                                 25
          And our groanes
  Under Syons ruines bury?
  Can we in this Land sing Layes
          In the praise
  Of our God, and here be merry?                                    30

VI.

  No; deare Syon, if I yet
          Do forget
  Thine affliction miserable,
  Let my nimble joynts become
          Stiffe and numme,                                         35
  To touch warbling harpe unable.

VII.

  Let my tongue lose singing skill,
          Let it still
  To my parched roofe be glewed,
  If in either harpe or voice                                       40
          I rejoyce,
  Till thy joyes shall be renewed.

VIII.

  Lord, curse Edom's traiterous kinde,
            Beare in minde
  In our ruines how they revell'd.                                  45
  _Sack_, _kill_, _burne_, they cry'd out still,
            _Sack_, _burne_, _kill_,
  Downe with all, let all be levell'd.

IX.

  And, thou Babel, when the tide
            Of thy pride                                            50
  Now a flowing, growes to turning;
  Victor now, shall then be thrall,
            And shall fall
  To as low an ebbe of mourning.

X.

  Happy he who shall thee waste,                                    55
            As thou hast
  Us, without all mercy, wasted,
  And shall make thee taste and see
            What poore wee
  By thy meanes have seene and tasted.                              60

XI.

  Happy, who, thy tender barnes
            From the armes
  Of their wailing mothers tearing,
  'Gainst the walls shall dash their bones,
            Ruthlesse stones                                        65
  With their braines and blood besmearing.


V.


_On the blessed Virgin Mary._

Probably by Henry Constable.

  In that, ô Queene of Queenes, thy birth was free
    From that which others doth of grace bereave,
    When in their mothers wombe they life receive,
  God, as his sole-borne daughter loved thee.

  To match thee like thy births nobilitie,                           5
    He thee his Spirit for thy spouse did leave,
    By whom thou didst his onely sonne conceive,
  And so wast link'd to all the Trinitie.

  Cease then, ô Queenes, that earthly Crownes doe weare,
    To glory in the Pompe of earthly things;                        10
  If men such high respects unto you beare,
    Which daughters, wives, and mothers are to Kings,
  What honour can unto that Queene be done
  Who had your God for Father, Spouse and Sonne?




VI.


_On the Sacrament._

  He was the Word that spake it,
  Hee tooke the bread and brake it;
  And what that Word did make it,
  I doe beleeve and take it.




VII.


_Absence._

  That time and absence proves
  Rather helps than hurts to loves.

Probably by John Hoskins.

  Absence heare my protestation
          Against thy strengthe
          Distance and lengthe,
  Doe what thou canst for alteration:
          For harts of truest mettall                                5
          Absence doth joyne, and time doth settle.

  Who loves a Mistris of right quality,
          His mind hath founde
          Affections grounde
  Beyond time, place, and all mortality:                            10
          To harts that cannot vary
          Absence is present, time doth tary:

  My Sences want their outward motion
          Which now within
          Reason doth win,                                          15
  Redoubled by her secret notion:
          Like rich men that take pleasure
          In hidinge more then handling treasure.

  By absence this good means I gaine
          That I can catch her                                      20
          Where none can watch her
  In some close corner of my braine:
          There I embrace and there kiss her,
          And so enjoye her, and so misse her.




VIII.


_Song._

Probably by the Earl of Pembroke.

  Soules joy, now I am gone,
          And you alone,
          (Which cannot be,
  Since I must leave my selfe with thee,
        And carry thee with me)                                      5
        Yet when unto our eyes
          Absence denyes
          Each others sight,
  And makes to us a constant night,
        When others change to light;                                10
          _O give no way to griefe,
          But let beliefe
            Of mutuall love,
          This wonder to the vulgar prove
            Our Bodyes, not wee move._                              15

  Let not thy wit beweepe
          Wounds but sense-deepe,
          For when we misse
  By distance our lipp-joying blisse,
      Even then our soules shall kisse,                             20
      Fooles have no meanes to meet,
          But by their feet.
          Why should our clay,
  Over our spirits so much sway,
      To tie us to that way?                                        25
          _O give no way to griefe, &c._




_A Dialogue._


EARLE OF PEMBROKE.

  If her disdaine least change in you can move,
                                you doe not love,
  For whilst your hopes give fuell to the fire,
                                you sell desire.
      Love is not love, but given free,                              5
      And so is mine, so should yours bee.

  Her heart that melts at others moane,
                                to mine is stone.
  Her eyes that weepe a strangers hurt to see,
                                joy to wound mee:                   10
      Yet I so much affect each part,
      As (caus'd by them) I love my smart.

  Say her disdaynings justly must be grac't
                                with name of chaste.
  And that shee frownes least longing should exceed,                15
                                and raging breed;
            Soe can her rigor ne'er offend
            Unlesse selfe-love seeke private end.


BEN: RUDDIER

  'Tis love breeds love in mee, and cold disdaine
                                kils that againe,                   20
  As water causeth fire to fret and fume,
                                till all consume.
            Who can of love more free gift make,
            Then to loves self, for loves own sake.

  I'll never dig in Quarry of an heart                              25
                                to have no part,
  Nor roast in fiery eyes, which alwayes are
                                Canicular.
      Who this way would a Lover prove,
      May shew his patience, not his love.                          30

  A frowne may be sometimes for physick good,
                                But not for food;
  And for that raging humour there is sure
                                A gentler Cure.
      Why barre you love of private end,                            35
      Which never should to publique tend?


 



IX.


_Break of Daye._

    Stanza prefixed to Donne's Poem (p. 23) in Stowe MS. 961 and
    in Edition of 1669.

Probably by John Dowlands.

  Stay, O sweet, and do not rise,
  The light that shines comes from thine eyes;
  The day breaks not, it is my heart,
  Because that you and I must part.
    Stay, or else my joys will die,                                  5
    And perish in their infancie.







I.


POEMS FROM ADDITIONAL MS. 25707.

_A Letter written by S^{r} H: G: and J: D: alternis vicibus._

  Since ev'ry Tree beginns to blossome now
  Perfuminge and enamelinge each bow,
  Hartes should as well as they, some fruits allow.

  For since one old poore sunn serves all the rest,
  You sev'rall sunns that warme, and light each brest                5
  Doe by that influence all your thoughts digest.

  And that you two may soe your vertues move,
  On better matter then beames from above,
  Thus our twin'd souls send forth these buds of love.

  As in devotions men Joyne both there hands,                       10
  Wee make ours doe one Act to seale the bands,
  By which we enthrall ourselves to your commands,

  And each for others faith and zeale stand bound:
  As safe as spirits are from any wound,
  Soe free from impure thoughts they shal be found.                 15

  Admit our magique then by which wee doe
  Make you appeere to us, and us to you,
  Supplying all the Muses in you twoe.

  Wee doe consider noe flower that is sweet,
  But wee your breath in that exhaling meet,                        20
  And as true types of you, them humbly greet.

  Heere in our Nightingales we heere you singe
  Who soe doe make the whole yeare through a springe,
  And save us from the feare of Autumns stinge.

  In Anchors calme face wee your smoothnes see,                     25
  Your mindes unmingled, and as cleare as shee
  That keepes untoucht her first virginitie.

  Did all St. Edith nunns descend againe
  To honor Polesworth with their cloystred traine,
  Compar'd with you each would confesse some stayne.                30

  Or should wee more bleed out our thoughts in inke,
  Noe paper (though it woulde be glad to drinke
  Those drops) could comprehend what wee doe thinke.

  For t'were in us ambition to write
  Soe, that because wee two, you two unite,                         35
  Our letter should as you, bee infinite.



_O Frutefull Garden._

  O Frutefull garden, and yet never tilde,
  Box full of Treasure yet by noe man filde.
  O thou which haste, made him that first made thee;
  O neare of kinne to all the Trinetie;
  O Pallace where the kinge of all, and more;                        5
  Went in, and out, yet never opened doore;
  Whose flesh is purer, than an others sperrit
  Reache him our Prayers, and reach us down his merrit;
  O bread of lyfe which sweld'ste up without Leaven;
  O bridge which joynst togeather earth and heaven;                 10
  Whose eyes see me through these walles, and throughe glasse,
  And through this fleshe as thorowe Cipres passe.
  Behould a little harte made greate by thee
  Swellinge, yet shrinkinge at thy majestie.
  O dwell in it, for where soe ere thou go'ste                      15
  There is the Temple of the Holy Ghoste.



_To my Lord of Pembroke._

  Fye, Fye you sonnes of Pallas what madd rage
  Makes you contend that Love's, or God, or page?
  Hee that admires, his weaknes doth confess;
  For as Love greater growes; soe hee growes less.
  Hee that disdaines, what honor wynns thereby,                      5
  That he feeles not, or triumphes on a fly?
  If love with queasie paine thy stomack move,
  Soe will a slutt whome none dare touch; or love.
  If it with sacred straines doe thee inspire
  Of Poetrie; soe wee maye want admire.                             10
  If it thee valiant make, his ryvall hate
  Can out doe that and make men desperate.
  Yealdinge to us, all woemen conquer us,
  By gentlenes we are betrayed thus.
  We will not strive with Love that's a shee beaste;                15
  But playinge wee are bounde, and yeald in Jest;
  As in a Cobwebb toyle, a flye hath beene
  Undone; so have I some fainte lover seene.
  Love cannot take away our strength, but tame,
  And wee less feele the thinge then feare the name;                20
  Love is a temperate bath; hee that feeles more
  Heate or could there, was hott, or could before.
  But as Suñ beames which would but norishe, burne,
  Drawne into hollow Christall, soe we turne
  To fire her bewties Lustre willingly,                             25
  By gatheringe it in our false treacherous eye.
  Love is nor you, nor you; but I a balme,
  Sword to the stiff, unto the wounded balme.
  Prayes noe thinge adds, if it be infinite,
  If it be nothing, who can lessen it?                              30



_Of a Lady in the Black Masque._

  Why chose shee black; was it that in whitenes
  Shee did Leda equal? whose brightnes
  Must suffer loss to put a bewtie on
  Which hath no grace but from proportion.
  It is but Coullor, which to loose is gayne,                        5
  For shee in black doth th'Æthiopian staine,
  Beinge the forme that beautifies the creature
  Her rareness not in Coullor is; but feature.
  Black on her receaves soe strong a grace
  It seemes the fittest beautie for the face.                       10
  Coullor is not, but in æstimation
  Faire, or foule, as it is stild by fashion.
  Kinges wearinge sackcloath it doth royall make;
  Soe black<ne>s from her face doth beautie take.
  It not in Coullor but in her, inheres,                            15
  For what she is, is faire, not what she weares;
  The Moore shalle envye her, as much, or more,
  As did the Ladies of our Court before.
  The Sunn shall mourne that hee had westwarde beene,
  To seeke his Love; whilst shee i'th North was seene.              20
  Her blacknes lends like lustre to her eyes,
  As in the night pale Phoebe glorifyes.
  Hell, synne, and vice their attributes shall loose
  Of black, for it wan, and pale whitenes choose,
  As like themselves, Common, and most in use:                      25
  Sad of that Coulor is the late abuse.



II.


POEMS FROM THE BURLEY MS.


<_Life._>

  This lyfe it is not life, it is a sight
  That wee have of y^e earth, y^e earth of vs;
  It is a feild, where sence & reason fight,
  The soules & bodies quarrells to discus;
    It is a iorney where wee do not goe,                             5
    but fly w^{th} speedy wings t'our blisse or woe.
  It is a chaine y^t hath but two smale links
  Where<with> o^r graue is to o^r bodie ioyned;
  It is a poysned feast wherein who thinks
  To tast ioyes cup, y^e cup of death doth find.                    10
    It is a play, presented in heauens eye
    Wherein o^r parts are to do naught but dye.




<_My Love._>

  My love doth fly w^{th} wings of feare
  And doth a flame of fire resemble,
  w^{ch} mounting high & burning cleere
  yet ever more doth wane & tremble.
  My loue doth see & still admire,                                   5
  Admiring breedeth humblenes;
  blind loue is bold, but my desire
  the more it loues p^{re}sumes y^e lesse.
  My loue seekes no reward or glory
  but w^{th} it self it self contenteth,                            10
  is never sullaine, never sory,
  never repyneth or repenteth.
  O'who the sunne beames can behold
  but hath some passion, feeles some heat,
  for though the sunn himself be cold                               15
  his beames reflecting fire begett.
  O y^t myne eyes, ô that myne hart
  Were both enlarged to contayne
  the beames & ioyes shee doth impart,
  whilst shee this bowre doth not disdayne;                         20
  this bowre vnfit for such a gueste,
  but since she makes it now her Inn,
  Would god twere like her sacred breast
  most fayre w^{th}out, most rich w^{th}in.




<_O Eyes!_>

  O Eyes, what do you see?
  O eares what do you heare?
  that makes y^o wish to bee
  All eyes or else all eare?
  I see a face as fayre                                              5
  As mans eye ever saw,
  I here as sweet an ayre
  as y^t w^{ch} rocks did draw,
  I wish, when in such wise
  I see or heare y^e same,                                          10
  I had all Argus eyes
  or else y^e eare<s> of fame.




<_Silence Best Praise._>

  Cõmend her? no. I dare not terme her fayre,
  nor sugred sweet, nor tall, nor louely browne;
  suffice it y^t she is w^{th}out compare;
  but how, I dare not tell lest she should frowne.
  but those parts <least> w^{ch} others make theyre pryde,           5
  and feed there fancies w^{th} devised lyes;
  giue me but leaue to pull my saint asyde,
  and tell her in her eare that she is wise.
  to write of beauties rare ther is noe art,
  for why tis common to there sex & kind,                           10
  but making choice of natures better part
  my Muse doth most desire to prayse her mind.
    But as her vertue<s> clayme a crowne of bayes,
    So manners makes me sylent in her prayse.



<_Beauty in Little Room._>

  Those drossy heads & irrepurged braynes
  w^{ch} sacred fyre of loue hath not refined
  may grossly think my loue smale worth contaynes
  because shee is of body smale combined.
  Not diving to y^e depth of natures reach,                          5
  W^{ch} on smale things doth greatest guifts bestow:
  small gems & pearls do witt more truly teach
  W^ch little are yet great in vertue grow,
  of flowers most part y^e least wee sweetest see,
  of creatures having life & sence y^e annt                         10
  is smalst, yet great her guifts & vertues bee,
  frugall & provident for feare of want.
    Wherfore who sees not natures full intent?
    she made her smale to make her excellent.




<_Loves Zodiake._>

  I that y^e higher half of loues
  Round Zodiake haue rune,
  And in the signe of crabbed chaunce
  My Tropick haue begun,
  Am taught to teach y^e man is blest                                5
  Whose loues lott lights so badd,
  as his solstitium soonest makes
  And so growes Retrograde.






<_Fortune, Love, and Time._>

  When fortune, loue, and Tyme bad me be happie,
  Happy I was by fortune, loue, and tyme.
  These powres at highest then began to vary,
  and cast him downe whome they had caus'd to clyme;
    They prun'd theire wings, and tooke theire flight in rage;       5
    fortune to fooles, loue to gold, and tyme to age.

  Fooles, gold, and age, (o foolish golden age!)
  Witt, fayth, and loue must begg, must brybe, must dy;
  These are the actors and the world's the stage,
  Desert and hope are as but standers by:                           10
    True lovers sit and tune this restlesse song;
    Fortune, loue, and tyme haue done me wrong.




<_Life a Play._>

  What is o^r life? a play of passion.
  o^r mirth? the musick of diuision.
  O^r mothers wombs the tyring houses bee
  Where we are drest for liues short comedy.
  The earth the stage, heauen y^e spectator is,                      5
  Who still doth note who ere do act amisse.
  O^r graues that hyde vs, frõ the all-seeing suñ,
  Are but drawne curtaynes whẽ the play is done.



_A Kisse._

  O what a blisse
  is this?
    heaven is effected
    and loues eternity contracted
      In one short kisse.                                            5
  For not tymes measure
      makes pleasure
        more full,
    tedious and dull
    all ioyes are thought                                           10
    y^t are not in an instant wrought.
  Cupi<d>s blest and highest spheare
        is heare.
    heere on his throne
    in his bright imperial crowne                                   15
        hee sitts.
        Those witts
    That thinke to proue
    that mortals know
    in any place below                                              20
      a blisse so great
        so sweet
    Are heretiques in loue.
  These pleasures high
        now dye,                                                    25
    but still beginning
    new & greater glory wiñing
      gett fresh supply.
    No short breath'd panting
      nor faynting                                                  30
        is heere,
    fuller and freer
    more pleasinge is
    this pleasure still, & none but this.
  Heer'es no blush nor labor great,                                 35
        no sweat;
    Heres no payne
    nor repentance when againe
        Loue cooles.
        O fooles                                                    40
    That fondly glory
      in base condition
      of sensual fruition,
    you do mistake
        & make                                                      45
      y^r heaven purgatory.



_Epi: B: Jo:_

  Tell me who can when a player dies
    In w^{ch} of his shapes againe hee shall rise?
  What need hee stand at the iudgment throne
  Who hath a heaven and a hell of his owne.
    Then feare not Burbage heavens angry rodd,                       5
    When thy fellows are angells & old Hemmĩgs is God.



_Epi: Hen: Princ: Hug^o Holland._

  Loe now hee shineth yonder
    A fixed starr in heaven,
  Whose motion is vnder
  None of the planetts seaven;
    And if the soñ should tender                                     5
    The moone his loue and marry,
    They never could engender
    So fayre a starr as Harry.



III.


POEMS FROM VARIOUS MSS.


<_The Annuntiation._

_Additional Lines._>

  Nature amaz'd sawe man without mans ayde
  Borne of a mother nursed by her a mayd,
  The child the Parent was, the worke the word,
  No word till then did such a worke affoord.
  Twas lesse from nothing the world's all to growe                   5
  Then all-Creato^{rs} height to stoope so lowe.
  A virgin mother to a child bredd wonder,
  T'was more a child should bee the God of thunder.
  Th'omnipotent was strangely potent heere
  To make the powerfull God pearelesse appeare.                     10
  Hee in our body cladd, for our soules love
  Came downe to us, yet stay'd vnchanged above.
  Yet God through man shind still in this cleere brooke,
  Through meane shewes into maiesty wee looke.
  Sinnes price seemd payd with brasse, fewe sawe the gold,          15
  Yet true stones set in lead theyr lustre hold.
  His birth though poore, Prophets foretold his story,
  Hee breathd with beasts, but Angels sung his glory.
  Hee, so farr of, so weake, yet Herod quakes,
  The citty dreads, babes, murderd, feare mistakes.                 20
  His Circumcision bore sinne, payne, and shame,
  Young bloud new budd, hence bloomd a sauiours name.
  His paynes and passion bredd compassion, wonder;
  Earth trembling, heavens darke, rocks rent asunder.
  His birth, life, death, his words, his workes, his face           25
  Shewd a rich Jewell shining through the case,
  Cast thus, since man at gods high presence trembles.
  Heere man mans troth loves whome his sheepe resembles.
  The bright Sunne beame a sickly eye may dime,
  A little babe in shallow heart may swim.                       30
  Hee heavens wealth to a poore stable brings,
  Th'oxestall the Court unto the king of kings.
  No Shadowes now nor lightning flames give terro^r.
  This light tells with our tongue, and beares o^r erro^r.
  Pure infant teares, moist pearle adornd his cheeke,               35
  Assignd, ere borne, our erring soules to seeke.
  Hee first wept teares, then bloud, a deare redemption;
  This bought what Adam sould, that seemd preemption.
  Cleare droppe, deare seede, the corne had bloudy eares,
  Rich harvest reapd in bloud and sowne in teares.                  40
  Who this Corne in theyr hart nor thresh, nor lay,
  Breake for sinnes debt, unthrifty never pay.
  Use wealth, it wastes, a stayd hand heapes the store,
  But this the more wee use wee have the more;
  Use, not like usury whose growth is lending,                      45
  Rich thoughts this treasure keepe and thrive by spending;
  Th'expense runnes circular, turning returning,
  Such love no hart consumes, yet ever burning.




_Elegy. To Chast Love._

  Chast Love, let mee embrace thee in mine armes
  Without the thought of lust. From thence no harmes
  Ensue, no discontent attende those deeds
  So innocently good w^{ch} thy love breeds.
  Th'approche of day brings to thy sence no feares,                  5
  Nor is the black nights worke washd in thy teares;
  Thou takst no care to keepe thy lover true,
  Nor yet by flighte, nor fond inventions new
  To hold him in, who with like flame of love
  Must move his spirit too, as thine doth move;                     10
  w^{ch} ever mounts aloft with golden wings
  And not declines to lowe despised things.
  Thy soule is bodyd within thy quiet brest
  In safety, free from trouble and unrest.
  Thou fearst no ill because thou dost no ill,                      15
  Like mistress of thy selfe, thy thought, and will,
  Obey thy mind, a mind for ever such
  As all may prayse, but none admire too much.
    Then come, Chast Love, choyse part of womankind
    Infuse chast thoughts into my loving mind.                      20






_Upon his scornefull Mistresse. Elegy._

  Cruell since that thou dost not feare the curse
    W^{ch} thy disdayne, and my despayre procure,
  My prayer for thee shall torment thee worse
    Then all the payne thou coudst thereby endure.
  May, then, that beauty w^{ch} I did conceave                       5
    In thee above the height of heavens course,
  When first my Liberty thou didst bereave,
    Bee doubled on thee and with doubled force.
  Chayne thousand vassalls in like thrall with mee,
    W^{ch} in thy glory mayst thou still despise,                   10
  As the poore Trophyes of that victory
    Which thou hast onely purchasd by thine eyes;
  And when thy Triumphs so extended are
    That there is nought left to bee conquered,
  Mayst thou with the great Monarchs mournfull care                 15
    Weepe that thine Hono^{rs} are so limited;
  So thy disdayne may melt it selfe to love
    By an unlookd for and a wondrous change,
  W^{ch} to thy selfe above the rest must prove
    In all th'effects of love paynefully strange,                   20
      While wee thy scorned subjects live to see
      Thee love the whole world, none of it love thee.



<_Absence._>

    Wonder of Beautie, Goddesse of my sense,
    You that have taught my soule to love aright,
    You in whose limbes are natures chief expense
    Fitt instrument to serve your matchless spright,
    If ever you have felt the miserie                                5
    Of being banish'd from your best desier,
    By Absence, Time, or Fortunes tyranny,
    Sterving for cold, and yet denied for fier:
    Deare mistresse pittie then the like effects
    The which in mee your absence makes to flowe,                   10
    And haste their ebb by your divine aspect
    In which the pleasure of my life doth growe:
  Stay not so long for though it seem a wonder
  You keepe my bodie and my soule asunder.

  FINIS.




<_Tongue-tied Love._>

    Faire eies do not think scorne to read of Love
    That to your eies durst never it presume,
    Since absence those sweet wonders do<th> remove
    That nourish thoughts, yet sence and wordes consume;
    This makes my pen more hardy then my tongue,                     5
    Free from my feare yet feeling my desire,
    To utter that I have conceal'd so long
    By doing what you did yourself require.
    Believe not him whom Love hath left so wise
    As to have power his owne tale for to tell,                     10
    For childrens greefes do yield the loudest cries,
    And cold desires may be expressed well:
  In well told Love most often falsehood lies,
  But pittie him that only sighes and dies.

  FINIS.




<_Love, if a God thou art._>

  Love if a god thou art
     then evermore thou must
     Bee mercifull and just;
  If thou bee just, ô wherefore doth thy dart
  Wound mine alone and not my mistresse hart?                        5

  If mercifull, then why
     Am I to payne reservd
     Who have thee truely serv'd,
  When shee that by thy powre sets not a fly
  Laughs thee to scorne and lives at liberty?                       10

  Then if a God thou woulds accounted bee,
  Heale mee like her, or else wound her like mee.




<_Great Lord of Love._>

  Greate Lord of love, how busy still thou art
  To give new wounds and fetters to my hart!
  Is't not enough that thou didst twice before
               It so mangle
               And intangle                                          5
               By sly arts
               of false harts.
     Forbeare mee, Ile make love no more.

  Fy busy Lord, will it not thee suffice
  To use the Rhetorique of her tongue and eyes                      10
  When I am waking, but that absent so
               They invade mee
               To perswade mee,
               When that sleepe
               Oft should keepe                                     15
     And lock out every sence of woe.

  If thou perswade mee thus to speake, I dye
  And shee the murdresse, for me will deny;
  And if for silence I bee prest, Her good
              Yet I cherish                                         20
              Though I perish,
              For that shee
              Shall bee free
    From that foule guilt of spilling bloud.



<_Loves Exchange_>

  1. To sue for all thy Love, and thy whole hart
                          were madnesse.
          I doe not sue, nor can admitt,
          (Fayrest) from yo^u to have all yet;
     Who giveth all, hath nothing to impart                          5
                          But sadnesse.

  2. Hee who receaveth all can have no more,
                          Then seeing.
          My love by length of every howre
          Gathers new strength, new growth, new power:              10
     You must have dayly new rewards in store
                          Still beeing.

  3. You cannot every day give mee yo^r hart
                          For merit;
          Yet if you will, when yours doth goe                      15
          You shall have still one to bestow,
     For you shall mine, when yours doth part,
                          Inherit.

  4. Yet if you please weele find a better way
                          Then change them,                         20
          For so alone (dearest) wee shall
          Bee one and one another all;
     Let us so joyne our harts, that nothing may
                          Estrange them.




_Song._

  Now y'have killd mee with yo^{r} scorne
    Who shall live to call yo^{u} fayre?
  What new foole must now bee borne
                  To prepare
  Dayly sacrifice of service new,                                    5
  Teares too good for woemen true?
    Who shall sorrow when yo^{u} crye
    And to please yo^{u} dayly dye?
      Men succeeding shall beware
      And woemen cruell, no more fayre.                             10

2.

  Now y'have killd mee, never looke
    Any left to call yo^{u} trewe;
  Who more madd must now bee tooke
                  To renewe
  My oblations dayly, lost?                                         15
  Vowes too good for woemen chast!
    Who shall call yo^{u} sweete, and sweare
    T'is yo^{r} face renews the yeare?
      Men by my Death shall beleeve,
      And woemen cruell yet shall greeve.                           20






_Love, bred of glances._

  Love bred of Glances twixt amorous eyes
  Like Childrens fancies, sone borne, sone dyes.
      Guilte, Bitternes, and smilinge woe
      Doth ofte deceaue poore lovers soe,
  As the fonde Sence th'unwary soule deceives                        5
  With deadly poison wrapt in Lily leaves.

  But harts so chain'd as Goodnes stands
  With truthe unstain'd to couple hands,
      Love beinge to all beauty blinde
      Save the cleere beauties of the minde,                        10
  There heaven is pleasd, continuall blessings sheddinge,
  Angells are guests and dance at this blest weddinge.




_To a Watch restored to its Mystres._

  Goe and Count her better howers.
  For they are happier than oures.
  The day that gives her any bliss,
  Make it as long againe as 'tis.
  The hower shee smyles in, lett it bee                              5
  By thy acte multiplyde to three.
  But if shee frowne on thee or mee,
  Know night is made by her, not thee;
  Be swifte in such an hower & soone,
  See thou make night, ere it be noone.                             10
  Obey her tymes, whoe is the free
  Faire Sunne that governes thee & mee.



<_Ad Solem._>

  Wherfore peepst thou, envious daye?
    We can kisse without thee.
  Lovers hate the golden raye,
    Which thou bearst about thee.
  Goe and give them light that sorowe                                5
    Or the saylor flyinge:
  Our imbraces need noe morowe
    Nor our blisses eying.

  We shall curse thy curyous eye
    For thy soone betrayinge,                                       10
  And condemn thee for a spye
    Yf thou catch us playinge.
  Gett thee gone and lend thy flashes
    Where there's need of lendinge,
  Our affections are not ashes                                      15
    Nor our pleasures endinge.

  Weare we cold or withered heare
    We would stay thee by us,
  Or but one anothers feare
    Then thou shouldst not flye us.                                 20
  Wee are yongue, thou spoilst our pleasure;
    Goe to sea and slumber,
  Darknes only gives us leasure
    Our stolne joyes to number.




<_If She Deride._>

  Greate and goode if she deryde mee
    Let me walke Ile not despayre,
  Ere to morrowe Ile provide mee
    One as greate, lesse prowd, more faire.
  They that seeke Love to constraine                                 5
  Have theire labour for their paine.

  They that strongly can importune
    And will never yeild nor tyre,
  Gaine the paye in spight of Fortune
    But such game Ile not desyre.                                   10
  Where the prize is shame or synn,
  Wynners loose and loosers wynn.

  Looke upon the faythfull lover,
    Griefe stands paynted in his face,
  Groanes, and Teares and sighs discover                            15
    That they are his onely grace:
  Hee must weepe as children doe
  That will in the fashion wooe.

  I whoe flie these idle fancies
    Which my dearest rest betraye,                                  20
  Warnd by others harmfull chances,
    Vse my freedome as I may.
  When all the worlde says what it cann
  'Tis but--Fie, vnconstant mann!



<_Fortune Never Fails._>

  What if I come to my mistris bedd
    The candles all ecclipst from shyninge,
  Shall I then attempt for her mayden-head
    Or showe my selfe a coward by declyninge?
          Oh noe                                                     5
        Fie doe not soe,
    For thus much I knowe by devyninge,
          Blynd is Love
        The dark it doth approve,
    To pray on pleasures pantinge;                                  10
          What needeth light
        For Cupid in the night,
    If jealous eyes be wantinge.

  Fortune never failes, if she badd take place,
    To shroude all the faire proceedings:                           15
  Love and she though blynd, yet each other embrace,
    To favor all their servants meetings:
          Venture I say
        To sport and to play,
    If in place all be fitting;                                     20
          Though she say fie
        Yet doth she not denie:
    For fie is but a word of tryall:
          Jealosie doth sleepe,
        Then doe not weepe                                          25
    At force of a faynt denyall.

  Glorious is my love, with tryumphs in her face,
    Then to to bould were I to venter:
  Who loves deserves to live in a princes grace,
    Why stand you then affraid to enter?                            30
          Lights are all out
        Then make noe doubt
    A lover bouldly maye take chusinge.
          Bewtie is a baite
        For a princely mate.                                        35
    Fy, why stand you then a musinge?
          You'll repent too late
        If she doe you hate,
    For loves delight refusinge.


_To His Mistress._

  1. Beleeve yo^r Glasse, and if it tell you (Deare)
                Yo^r Eyes inshrine
                A brighter shine
     Then faire Apollo, looke if theere appeare
                The milkie skye                                      5
                The Crimson dye
     Mixt in your cheeks, and then bid Phoebus sett,
     More Glory then hee owes appears.  But yet

  2. Be not deceived with fond Alteration
                 .    .    .    .    .                              10
                 .    .    .    .    .
     .     .     .    .    .    .    .    .
                As Cynthias Globe,
                A snow white robe
     Is soonest spotled, a Carnation dye                            15
     Fades, and discolours open'd but to Eie.

  3. Make use of youth, and bewty whilest they flourish:
                Tyme never sleepes,
                Though it but creeps
     It still gets forward. Do not vainly nourish                   20
                Them to selfe-use,
                It is Abuse;
     The richest Grownds lying wast turne Boggs and rott,
     And soe beinge useles, were as good were not.

  4. Walke in a meddowe by a Rivers side,                           25
                Upon whose Bancks
                Grow milk-white Ranks
     Of full blown Lyllies in their height of Pryde,
                  Which downward bend
                  And nothing tend                                  30
      Save their owne Bewties in the Glassie streame:
      Looke to yo^r selfe: Compare yo^{r}selfe to them.

  5.  In show, in bewtie, marke what followes then:
                  Sommer must end,
                  The sunn must bend                                35
      His Longe Absented beames to others: then
                  Their spring being crost
                  By wynters frost
      And sneap'd by bytter storms against w^{ch} nought boots,
      They bend their prowd topps lower then their roots.           40

  6.  Then none regard them; but w^{th} heedles feet
                  In durt each treads
                  Their declyned heads.
      So when youthe wasted, Age, and yo^u shall meet,
                  Then I alone
                  Shall sadly moane                                 45
      That Interviewe; others it will not move,
      So light regard we, what we little Love.

                        FINIS.




_A Paradoxe of a Painted Face._

  Not kisse? By Jove I must, and make impression
  As longe as Cupid dares to holde his Session
  Vpon my flesh and blood: our kisses shall
  Outminute Time and without number fall.
  Doe I not know these Balls of blushinge Red                        5
  That on thy Cheekes thus amorouslie are spred?
  Thy snowy necke, those veynes upon thy Browe
  Which with their azure crincklinge sweetly bowe
  Are artificiall? Borrowed? and no more thine owne
  Then Chaines which on St. George's Day are showne,                10
  Are proper to the wearers? Yet for this
  I idole thee, and beg a luscious kisse.
  The fucus, and Ceruse, which on thy face
  Thy Cunninge hand layes on to add new Grace,
  Detaine me with such pleasing fraude, that I                      15
  Finde in thy art, what can in nature Lie.
  Much like a painter that upon some Wall
  On which the radiant Sun-beames use to fall
  Paints with such art a Gilded butterflye
  That silly maides with slowe-moved fingers trye                   20
  To Catch it, and then blush at theire mistake,
  Yet of this painted flye most reckonynge make:
  Such is our state; since what we looke upon
  Is nought but Coullor and Proportion.
  Take me a face, as full of fraud and Lies                         25
  As Gypsies in your cunninge Lotteries,
  That is more false, and more Sophisticate
  Than are Saints reliques, or a man of state.
  Yet such being Glazed by the sleight of arte,
  Gaines admiration, winninge many a Harte.                         30
  Put case there be a difference in the molde,
  Yet may thy Venus be more Chaste, and holde
  A dearer treasure: oftentimes we see
  Rich Candian wines in woodden Boules to bee.
  The odoriferous Civet doth not lie                                35
  Within the muskat's nose, or eare, or eye,
  But in a baser place; for prudent nature
  In drawinge us of various formes and stature
  Gives from the curious shop of hir rich treasure
  To faire parts comeliness, to baser, pleasure.                    40
  The fairest flowers, which in the Springe doe growe
  Are not so much for use, as for the showe,
  As Lillies, Hyacinths, and the georgious birthe
  Of all pide flowers that diaper the earthe,
  Please more with their discoloured purple traine                  45
  Then wholesome pothearbs which for use remaine.
  Shall I a Gaudy Speckled Serpent kiss
  For that the colours which he weares are his?
  A perfumed Cordevant who will not wear
  Because the sente is borrowed elsewhere?                          50
  The roabes and vestiments, which grace us all
  Are not our owne, but adventitiall.
  Time rifles Natures beauty, but slye Arte
  Repaires by cunninge this decayinge parte.
  Fills here a wrinckle, and there purles a veyne,                  55
  And with a nimble hand runs o're againe
  The breaches dented in by th'arme of time,
  And makes Deformity to be no crime.
  As when great men be grip't by sicknes hand,
  Industrious Physicke pregnantly doth stand                        60
  To patch up foule diseases, and doth strive
  To keepe theire totteringe Carcasses alive.
  Beautie is a candlelight which every puffe
  Blowes out, and leaves nought but a stinking snuffe
  To fill our nostrills with; this boldelie thinke,                 65
  The cleerest Candle makes the greatest stincke,
  As your pure fode and cleerest nutryment
  Gets the most hott, and nose stronge excrement.
  Why hange we then on thinges so apt to varie,
  So fleetinge, brittle, and so temporarie?                         70
  That agues, Coughes, the toothache, or Catarr
  (Slight hansells of diseases) spoile and marr.
  But when olde age theire beauties hath in Chace,
  And plowes up furrowes in theire once-smoothe face,
  Then they become forsaken, and doe showe                          75
  Like stately abbeyes ruin'd longe agoe.
  Nature but gives the modell, and first draught
  Of faire perfection, which by art is taught
  To speake itselfe, a compleat form and birthe,
  Soe stands a Copie to these shapes on earthe.                     80
  Jove grante me then a reparable face
  Which, whiles that Colours are, can want no grace.
  Pigmalions painted statue I coulde love,
  Soe it were warme and softe, and coulde but move.



_Sonnett._

  Madam that flea that Crept between your brests
  I envied, that there he should make his rest:
  The little Creatures fortune was soe good
  That Angells feed not on so pretious foode.
  How it did sucke how eager tickle you                              5
  (Madam shall fleas before me tickle you?)

  Oh I can not holde; pardon if I kild it.
  Sweet Blood, to you I aske this, that which fild it
  Ran from my Ladies Brest. Come happie flea
  That dide for suckinge of that milkie Sea.                        10
  Oh now againe I well could wishe thee there,
  About hir Hart, about hir anywhere;
  I would vowe (Dearest flea) thou shouldst not dye,
  If thou couldst sucke from hir hir crueltye.




_On Black Hayre and Eyes._

  If shaddowes be the pictures excellence;
  And make it seeme more lively to the sence;
  If starres in the bright day are hid from sight
  And shine most glorious in the masque of night;
  Why should you thinke (rare creature) that you lack                5
  Perfection cause your haire and eyes are blacke,
  Or that your heavenly beauty which exceedes
  The new sprung lillies in their mayden weeds,
  The damaske coullour of your cheekes and lipps
  Should suffer by their darknesse an eclipps?                      10
  Rich diamonds shine brightest, being sett
  And compassed within a foyle of Jett.
  Nor was it fitt that Nature should have mayde
  So bright a sunne to shine without a shade.
  It seemes that Nature when she first did fancie                   15
  Your rare composure studied Necromancie,
  That when to you this guift she did impart
  She used altogether the black art.
  By which infused power from Magique tooke
  You doe command all spiritts with a looke:                        20
  Shee drew those Magique circles in your eyes,
  And mayde your hayre the chaines wherewith shee ties
  Rebelling hearts: those blew veines which appeare,
  Winding Meander about either spheare,
  Misterious figures are, and when you list                         25
  Your voice commandeth like the Exorcist,
  And every word which from your Pallett falleth
  In a deep charme your hearer's heart inthralleth.
  Oh! If in Magique you have skill so farre,
  Vouchsafe me to be your familiar.                                 30
  Nor hath kind Nature her black art reveal'd
  To outward partes alone, some lie conceal'd,
  And as by heads of springs men often knowe
  The nature of the streames that run belowe,
  So your black haire and eyes do give direction                    35
  To make me thinke the rest of like complexion:
  That rest where all rest lies that blesseth Man,
  That Indian mine, that straight of Magellan,
  That worlde dividing gulfe where he that venters,
  With swelling sayles and ravisht senses enters                    40
  To a new world of blisse. Pardon, I pray,
  If my rude muse presumeth to display
  Secretts unknowne, or hath her bounds orepast
  In praysing sweetnesse which I ne're did tast;
  Sterved men doe know there's meate, and blind men may             45
  Though hid from light presume there is a day.
  The rover in the marke his arrowe sticks
  Sometimes as well as he that shootes att prickes,
  And if I might direct my shaft aright,
  The black mark would I hitt and not the white.                    50


_Fragment of an Elegy._

  And though thy glasse a burning one become
  And turne us both to ashes on her urne,
  Yet to our glory till the later day
  Our dust shall daunce like attomes in her ray.
  And when the world shall in confusion burne,                       5
  And Kinges and peasantes scramble at an urne,
  Like tapers new blowne out wee happy then
  Will at her beames catch fire and live againe.
  But this is sence, and some one may-be glad
  That I so good a cause of sorrow had,                             10
  Will with all those whome I affect may dye
  So I might please him with an elegie.
  O let there never line of witt be read
  To please the living that doth speake thee dead;
  Some tender-harted mother good and mild,                          15
  Who on the deare grave of her tender child
  So many sad teares hath beene knowne to rayne
  As out of dust would mould him up againe,
  And with hir plaintes enforce the wormes to place
  Themselves like veynes so neatly on his face,                     20
  And every lymne, as if that they wer striving
  To flatter hir with hope of his reviving:
  Shee should read this, and hir true teares alone
  Should coppy forth these sad lines on the stone
  Which hides thee dead, and every gentle hart                      25
  That passeth by should of his teares impart
  So great a portion, that if after times
  Ruine more churches for the Clergyes crimes,
  When any shall remove thy marble hence,
  Which is lesse stone then hee that takes it thence,               30
  Thou shalt appeare within thy tearefull cell
  Much like a faire nymph bathing in a well.
  But when they find thee dead so lovely fair,
  Pitty and sorrow then shall straight repaire
  And weepe beside thy grave with cipresse cround,                  35
  To see the secound world of beauty dround,
  And add sufficient teares as they condole
  'Twould make thy body swimme up to thy soule.
  Such eyes should read the lines are writ of thee;
  But such a losse should have no elegie                            40
  To palliate the wound wee tooke in hir,
  Who rightly greeves admittes no comforter.
  He that had tane to heart thy parting hence
  Should have beene chain'd to Bedlam two houres thence,
  And not a frind of his ere shed a teare                           45
  To see him for thy sake distracted there,
  But hugge himselfe for loving such as hee
  That could runne mad with greefe for loosing thee.
  I, haplesse soule, that never knew a frend
  But to bewayle his too untimely end,                              50
  Whose hopes (cropt in the bud) have never come
  But to sitt weeping on a sencelesse tombe,
  That hides not dust enough to count the teares
  Which I have fruitlesse spent in so few yeares,
  I that have trusted those that would have given                   55
  For our deare Saviour and the Sonne of heaven
  Ten times the valew Judas had of yore,
  Onely to sell him for three peeces more;
  I that have lov'd and trusted thus in vaine
  Yet weepe for thee, and till the clowdes shall daigne             60
  To throw on Egipt more then Nile ere sweld,
  These teares of mine shalbee unparellell'd.
  He that hath lov'd, enjoy'd, and then beene crost,
  Hath teares at will to mourne for what he lost;
  He that hath trusted and his hope appeares                        65
  Wrong'd but by death may soone dissolve in teares;
  But hee unhappy man whose love and trust
  Nere met fruition nor a promise just,
  For him (unlesse like thee hee deadly slepe)
  'Tis easier to runn mad then 'tis to weepe;                       70
  And yet I can. Fall then yee mournefull showers,
  And as old time leades on the winged howers,
  Bee you their minutes, and let men forgett
  To count their ages from the plague of sweat,
  From eighty eight, the Poulder-plot, or when                      75
  Men were affrayd to talke of it againe;
  And in their numerations be it sayd
  Thus old was I when such a teare was shed,
  And when that other fell a comett rose
  And all the world tooke notice of my woes.                        80
  Yet finding them past cure, as doctores fly
  Their patientes past all hope of remedy,
  No charitable soule will once impart
  One word of comfort to so sicke a heart;
  But as a hurt deare beaten from the heard,                        85
  Men of my shadow allmost now affeard
  Fly from my woes, that whilome wont to greet mee,
  And well nigh thinke it ominous to meete mee.
  Sad lines go yee abroad; go saddest muse,
  And as some nations formerly did use                              90
  To lay their sicke men in the street, that those,
  Who of the same disease had scapt the throwes,
  Might minister releefe as they went by
  To such as felt the selfsame malady,
  So haplesse lynes fly through the fairest land,                   95
  And if ye light into some blessed hand,
  That hath a heart as merry as the shine
  Of golden dayes, yet wrong'd as much as mine,
  Pitty may lead that happy man to mee,
  And his experience worke a remedy                                100
  To those sad fittes which (spight of nature's lawes)
  Torture a poore hart that out-lives the cause.
  But this must never bee, nor is it fitt
  An ague or some sickenes lesse then itt
  Should glory in the death of such as hee,                        105
  That had a heart of flesh and valued thee.
  Brave Roman, I admire thee that would'st dy
  At no lesse rate then for an empery.
  Some massy diamond from the center drawne,
  For which all Europ wer an equall pawne,                         110
  Should (beaten into dust) bee drunke by him
  That wanted courage good enough to swimme
  Through seas of woes for thee, and much despise
  To meet with death at any lower prize,
  Whilst greefe alone workes that effect in mee,                   115
  And yet no greefe but for the losse of thee.
  Fortune now doe thy worst, for I have gott
  By this her death so strong an antidote,
  That all thy future crosses shall not have
  More then an angry smile, nor shall the grave                    120
  Glory in my last day: these lines shall give
  To us a second life, and we will live
  To pull the distaffe from the hand of fate;
  And spinn our own thrides for so long a date,
  That death shall never seize uppon our fame                      125
  Till this shall perish in the whole world's frame.


<_Farewel, ye guilded follies._>

  Farewel ye guilded follies, pleasing troubles,
  Farewel ye honour'd rags, ye glorious bubbles;
  Fame's but a hollow echo, gold pure clay,
  Honour the darling but of one short day.
  Beauty (th'eyes idol) but a damasked skin,                         5
  State but a golden prison, to keepe in
  And torture free-born minds; imbroidered trains
  Meerly but Pageants, proudly swelling vains,
  And blood ally'd to greatness, is a loane
  Inherited, not purchased, not our own.                            10
    Fame, honor, beauty, state, train, blood and birth,
    Are but the fading blossomes of the earth.

  I would be great, but that the Sun doth still
  Level his rayes against the rising hill:
  I would be high, but see the proudest Oak                         15
  Most subject to the rending Thunder-stroke;
  I would be rich, but see men too unkind
  Dig in the bowels of the richest mine;
  I would be wise, but that I often see
  The Fox suspected whilst the Ass goes free;                       20
  I would be fair, but see the fair and proud
  Like the bright sun, oft setting in a cloud;
  I would be poor, but know the humble grass
  Still trampled on by each unworthy Asse:
  Rich, hated; wise, suspected; scorn'd, if poor;                   25
  Great, fear'd; fair, tempted; high, stil envied more:
    I have wish'd all, but now I wish for neither,
    Great, high, rich, wise, nor fair, poor I'l be rather.

  Would the world now adopt me for her heir,
  Would beauties Queen entitle me the Fair,                         30
  Fame speak me fortune's Minion, could I vie
  Angels with India, with a speaking eye
  Command bare heads, bow'd knees, strike Justice dumb
  As wel as blind and lame, or give a tongue
  To stones, by Epitaphs, be called great Master                    35
  In the loose rhimes of every Poetaster;
  Could I be more then any man that lives,
  Great, fair, rich, wise in all Superlatives;
  Yet I more freely would these gifts resign
  Then ever fortune would have made them mine,                      40
    And hold one minute of this holy leasure,
    Beyond the riches of this empty pleasure.

  Welcom pure thoughts, welcom ye silent groves,
  These guests, these Courts, my soul most dearly loves,
  Now the wing'd people of the Skie shall sing                      45
  My cheerful Anthems to the gladsome Spring;
  A Pray'r book now shall be my looking-glasse,
  Wherein I will adore sweet vertues face.
  Here dwell no hateful looks, no Pallace cares,
  No broken vows dwell here, nor pale-faced fears,                  50
  Then here I'l sit and sigh my hot loves folly,
  And learn t'affect an holy melancholy.
    And if contentment be a stranger, then
    I'l nere look for it, but in heaven again.


